[Amit Varma]: When I think about the battle for India's independence, I have to sometimes remind myself
[Amit Varma]: of the shifting meaning of both those words.
[Amit Varma]: For much of our freedom struggle, the word India would have had a shifting, nebulous
[Amit Varma]: meaning without the firm shape of the nation-state that we know by that name today.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, what was independence?
[Amit Varma]: Our early freedom fighters cared about the well-being of our people and negotiated for
[Amit Varma]: greater rights, but independence, in the specific shades of meaning of 1947, took shape pretty
[Amit Varma]: late in the game.
[Amit Varma]: This is especially so when I think of our 19th century leaders who had the harsh reality
[Amit Varma]: of the British Empire to work with, a reality they could not wish away.
[Unknown]: When Dadabhai Naoroji fought for his fellow Indians, what exactly was he fighting for?
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Today's episode is about Dadabhai Naoroji, known in our popular culture as a grand old
[Amit Varma]: man of India, a man who Mohandas Gandhi once called father of the nation.
[Amit Varma]: Naoroji was an inspiration not just for Gandhi, but an entire generation of our freedom fighters
[Amit Varma]: and he epitomized what is known as the moderate school within the Congress Party.
[Amit Varma]: He wanted peaceful change from within the system, so much so that he became the first
[Amit Varma]: Indian to win election into the British Parliament so that he could push for change from within.
[Amit Varma]: He was 67 years old at the time, with a lifetime of activism behind him, and in his last years,
[Amit Varma]: having failed in his moderate ways, he turned towards the so-called extremist wing of the
[Amit Varma]: Congress Party, men like Bal Gangadhar Tilak, and gave them reason to be inspired.
[Amit Varma]: Dadabhai Naoroji lived into his 90s, and when a man spent so many decades in public life,
[Amit Varma]: beginning with fighting for the education of girls and ending with a battle against
[Amit Varma]: the empire, it's hard to build a simple narrative around him. Like so many other great figures
[Amit Varma]: in our freedom struggle, Naoroji contained multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today on the show is Dinyar Patel, whose outstanding biography of Naoroji, simply
[Amit Varma]: titled Naoroji, Pioneer of Indian Nationalism, is on the stands now. It's a rich and nuanced
[Amit Varma]: look at Naoroji's life, not just giving a sense of the interior life of this complex
[Amit Varma]: man, but also painting a vivid picture of Indian society and British politics. I had
[Amit Varma]: been hearing rave reviews of Dinyar's book for a while now, and I was delighted to get
[Amit Varma]: him onto the show. Before we begin our conversation though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Are you one of those people who not only loves to read, but also wants to write better? If
[Amit Varma]: so, I have something for you. Since April this year, I've been teaching an online course
[Amit Varma]: called The Art of Clear Writing, four webinars spread out over four Saturdays, in which I
[Amit Varma]: share whatever I've learned about the craft and practice of writing over 25 years as a
[Amit Varma]: professional writer. The course also contains many writing exercises, discussions on email
[Amit Varma]: and WhatsApp, and much interactivity. It costs rupees 10,000 or $150. You can check out the
[Amit Varma]: details at indiankar.com slash clear writing. This link will be in the show notes. If you
[Amit Varma]: want to bridge the gap between the thoughts in your head and the words on the page, then
[Amit Varma]: the art of clear writing might be just what you need. September batches begin on Saturday,
[Amit Varma]: September 5th. So hurry and register before then, indianuncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Dinyar, welcome to the scene and the unseen. Thank you. It's great to be here.
[Amit Varma]: Dinyar, I loved reading your book on Dadabhai Naoroji, especially because despite my deep
[Amit Varma]: interest in Indian history, I hadn't really read much about him. You know, he was a peripheral
[Amit Varma]: figure in all the other books I'd read on Gokhale and the 19th century freedom struggle
[Amit Varma]: and so on. And part of the reason, of course, is that your book is really the first comprehensive
[Amit Varma]: biography out there. But before we get started on the book, which, you know, had so many
[Amit Varma]: TIL moments for me, and I enjoyed reading so thoroughly, I'd like to know a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about yourself, you know, what has your journey been like, not just your, you know, bare bones
[Amit Varma]: career or academic journey to getting a PhD in history and at Harvard and writing the
[Amit Varma]: book and so on. But in general, your intellectual history, who are the sort of thinkers who
[Amit Varma]: influenced you? Were there books that made a big difference to your life? What drew you
[Amit Varma]: to history? What drew you to Dadabhai?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I was born and raised in the US, actually, I was born in Houston, and I grew
[Guest]: up in a relatively small town in California called Bakersfield, which is unlike most of
[Guest]: California in the sense that it's quite conservative. And, you know, it's the type of place that
[Guest]: voted for Trump quite solidly in the last election. So keeping in mind where I grew
[Guest]: up, it's a little bit of an unusual trajectory to first of all, land up in Mumbai and also
[Guest]: be studying Indian history. But I think there were a few things again, growing up that kind
[Guest]: of pointed me in this direction, studying kind of the world around you. When at least
[Guest]: I was in school, again, obviously, before internet and such, I, you know, while other
[Guest]: people are reading, you know, teenage novels or whatnot, I would pick up books from a series
[Guest]: that our library had on countries around the world. And I just got very interested in geography,
[Guest]: you know, in the US, at least there's a geography B that takes place. So I used to take part
[Guest]: in that every year. And so I just, you know, I think also just growing up in a relatively
[Guest]: small town, you naturally become much more interested in the world around you. And, you
[Guest]: know, the little bit of experience I had traveling before college kind of solidified that experience.
[Guest]: I, you know, I remember going with my mother to visit relatives in Calcutta when I was
[Guest]: about 10 years old. And that was kind of the first trip at least to India, which I really
[Guest]: remembered and kind of left an impression on me and also traveling through different
[Guest]: parts of Asia on the way to get there between Los Angeles and Calcutta, through Bangkok
[Guest]: and Tokyo. And so once I got to college, at least, you know, I was deciding between two
[Guest]: different trajectories. I've, I've always been quite interested in architecture and
[Guest]: urban planning. And still, to this day, I kind of wonder if maybe I should have done
[Guest]: that instead. But the other trajectory was doing something with international relations
[Guest]: or history. And so in college, I went to college in Stanford, I started taking a lot of IR,
[Guest]: international relations courses and history courses, and eventually studied abroad or
[Guest]: worked abroad for the equivalent of about one and a half years. And that really was
[Guest]: a very formative experience for me. I mean, just kind of living outside of one's comfort
[Guest]: zone. And, you know, I studied in China for a long time. Actually, I learned Chinese in
[Guest]: college and eventually gave it up once I realized that I just could not, you know, I just could
[Guest]: not do the language. It's, it's a very complex process. But nevertheless, that allowed me
[Guest]: the opportunity to live in China for a few months in, I think, the year 2002. So a fascinating
[Guest]: time to be there. I just do with all the breakneck change. I got to see the Three Gorges Dam
[Guest]: being under construction, go to parts of China that were just opening up to kind of foreign,
[Guest]: foreign visitors and, you know, signs of economic development around you. And slowly, I got
[Guest]: drawn more and more towards Indian history in college. And I worked for a few years after
[Guest]: college and while working, I decided I wanted to do a PhD, but in history, in Indian history
[Guest]: specifically. But I did not anticipate becoming an academic after doing a PhD. So even when
[Guest]: I was admitted to my program in Harvard, I told my advisor, look, you know, I probably
[Guest]: won't become an academic historian after this. I'll probably go into more of a policy world
[Guest]: type job. And I was looking at programs at MIT, for example, that had programs on on
[Guest]: IR and such. And as happens inevitably, I guess, when you're on a PhD program, you get
[Guest]: sucked into it. So you don't really have a choice. So, you know, here I am so many years
[Guest]: afterwards in an academic career. And when I began my academic career, at least in Harvard,
[Guest]: when I started my PhD, you know, I was very struck by certain things about the discipline
[Guest]: of Indian history. I mean, when you when you study 19th and 20th century history in India,
[Guest]: you notice that there's a great deal of focus on certain things, and the rest is oftentimes
[Guest]: just a blank slate. So there's a great deal of work on Bengal, specifically in the 19th
[Guest]: century. You have the subaltern studies perspective on kind of this bottom up approach of history.
[Guest]: You know, you have a great deal of writing on a few characters. But again, you know,
[Guest]: there was hardly anything on on on anyone else. So this struck me, especially for early
[Guest]: Indian nationalist leaders. I mean, where were good up to date books and writings on
[Guest]: figures like Naoroji, or Gokhale, or Ranade, or those other characters, or even later on?
[Guest]: I mean, people like Patel, or Azad, or others, where was that scholarship? And so I got attracted
[Guest]: to writing something on Naoroji for partly that reason. And the other reason was, I always
[Guest]: had a long standing interest in Parsi history. I'm a Parsi myself. And so, you know, a PhD
[Guest]: was a good excuse to kind of find out more about, you know, your community and your family.
[Guest]: And Naoroji kind of fit the bill. I mean, since he was a Parsi leader, in addition to
[Guest]: being a nationalist, he was kind of a natural choice for investigating and researching.
[Guest]: But you know, again, when you when you are in a PhD program in the US in history, and
[Guest]: you propose to write on someone like Naoroji, you oftentimes will get a lot of stares, or
[Guest]: people ask you, what are you doing? Because at least 10 years ago, that was not the type
[Guest]: of PhD dissertation people expected you to do, you're supposed to do something kind of,
[Guest]: I guess, you know, to use a word more fashionable, more in keeping with some of the political
[Guest]: orientations of the field, maybe something a bit more narrow, definitely not something
[Guest]: on a political elite. So I definitely got a lot of question marks from people, why are
[Guest]: you doing this? Why are you researching this boring elite? You know, who has very little
[Guest]: to do with where the rest of the field is going. And I was very lucky, at least in the
[Guest]: sense that my advisor was very supportive, first of all, and I got to meet other people
[Guest]: who were, you know, again, slowly changing the parameters of the field. So I met Ramchandra
[Guest]: Guha, when I was probably in my third or fourth year, I think, was, I think, third year of
[Guest]: my PhD program. And again, I found someone who was extremely supportive, and who has
[Guest]: supported me ever since then, and has, again, really helped shape the direction in history
[Guest]: where now we are taking biographies more seriously. So I was very fortunate to have that particular
[Guest]: source of help. And, you know, through Ram and through others, I've met so many others
[Guest]: who again, are kind of pushing the boundaries and helping diversify the field of history
[Guest]: beyond kind of the ideological frames that it's been, you know, oftentimes kind of channeled
[Amit Varma]: in over the past few decades.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, that that's something that, you know, non historians don't often realize looking
[Amit Varma]: from the outside in, that so much of history writing is driven by ideology, like you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out that it became unfashionable at one point to, you know, do biographies to focus on the
[Amit Varma]: lives of men, especially elite men, as Naoroji obviously was, and you instead want to, you
[Amit Varma]: know, follow other set narratives, and, you know, look at bottom up currents of history
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. And so is that something that was a strain to fight against in the
[Amit Varma]: academy? Or did you find that meeting professional historians who don't take that approach, like
[Amit Varma]: Ram, for example, is something that helped you kind of work past that? And what do you
[Amit Varma]: feel about that? Is that a problem? Does it color the way we view history or write history?
[Guest]: It definitely is a problem. I mean, now, I think that we're seeing a bit more of a diversity
[Guest]: in history. But I mean, when we think of the current political moment we're in right now,
[Guest]: I mean, obviously, politics and the way history has been politicized, if you think of, you
[Guest]: know, again, the whole principle of action and reaction, I mean, you can understand why
[Guest]: we're in a particular moment right now when history has been so deeply colored by political
[Guest]: perspectives from, you know, the other side, from the left side. So, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: when we have these particular narrow perspectives for studying history, and, you know, India
[Guest]: is no different in many cases from other parts of the world, which have had these ideological
[Guest]: straitjackets, you know, it has a knockoff effect. And yes, it was difficult a little
[Guest]: bit, you know, while writing and researching the PhD to kind of justify my project. But
[Guest]: with the help of people like Ram and others, and, you know, you meet people along the way
[Guest]: who kind of, you know, take on a supportive role. And I think as I started to write a
[Guest]: bit more about what I was finding, you know, I was looking at a series of papers in the
[Guest]: National Archives in Delhi, which really had not been looked at by more than three or four
[Guest]: historians ever, since Naroji passed away, you know, those tons of interesting new material
[Guest]: that, you know, one finds in such a collection. And once you start writing about that, people
[Guest]: tend to kind of latch on and realize that what, you know, what you're going after. So,
[Guest]: even though I've always been very skeptical about theory, I've never really enjoyed it,
[Guest]: I found it very frustrating to read in graduate school. And, you know, maybe I wasn't a very
[Guest]: popular grad student on account of that. I do think that I do believe very, very strongly
[Guest]: in kind of these strongly empirical groundings and methods that, you know, historians have
[Guest]: used. And, you know, the really good historians have, you know, known to make sure to read
[Guest]: everything that's out there, or, you know, as much as you possibly can. And that really,
[Guest]: you know, the example that I had from people like Ram or others, like the senior Indian
[Guest]: professor SR Mehrotra, really made a very big difference in kind of providing a source
[Amit Varma]: of encouragement. And one of the things that I really liked about your book is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when I get historians on the show, and if you're talking about the 17th century, or
[Amit Varma]: the 16th century, or whatever century, which is not the current time, you know, I'll often
[Amit Varma]: ask things like, what did they eat in those days? You know, what was their day like, give
[Amit Varma]: me a sense of the texture of their day and all of that. And they're kind of blank about
[Amit Varma]: that. And one of the things I enjoyed about your book is, of course, you said that there
[Amit Varma]: are a lot of papers which cover especially his London years, right down to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: little quotidian bills and small memos and all of that. But from all of that, you could
[Amit Varma]: actually also, you know, draw a picture for the reader of the kind of clothes he wore,
[Amit Varma]: how that changed depending on the occasion and the thinking behind it, the kind of food
[Amit Varma]: he ate, how, I mean, I was fascinated by, you know, he wakes up, he doesn't have breakfast,
[Amit Varma]: he has three raw eggs for lunch while standing and all of that. And, and those I thought
[Amit Varma]: were excellent details, which other historians may have just chosen to ignore because they're
[Amit Varma]: so mundane and banal that you, but I'm glad that you put them in. So tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about your process. And that's really a two part question. One is the process for
[Amit Varma]: the project. How do you approach the project? Where are the papers located? What kind of
[Amit Varma]: condition are they in? What do you do? Do you, you know, like, if they're at an archive,
[Amit Varma]: you go, you take them out, you photograph them all? How do you handle them? How are
[Amit Varma]: they kept? And then secondly, just the mental process of then working on the narrative where
[Amit Varma]: obviously you go in knowing a lot of facts about Naoroji, which are in the popular domain.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, do you kind of have to ignore them and pretend that you have a blank slate
[Amit Varma]: in your mind and you're discovering everything all over again, given that, you know, we all
[Amit Varma]: suffer from the hindsight bias, we know everything that has happened intimately, we feel it was
[Amit Varma]: inevitable. And your book doesn't seem to sort of make that mistake at all, you know,
[Amit Varma]: reflected, for example, in the way that someone like Mahatma Gandhi plays such a small peripheral
[Amit Varma]: part in it, though I can easily imagine other approaches to the history making, you know,
[Amit Varma]: because of what he went on to become, giving more importance to his connection with Naoroji,
[Amit Varma]: but he was a peripheral figure for India and Naoroji and that kind of comes across. So
[Amit Varma]: yeah, so these two, you know, one is, you know, what is the process in terms of physically
[Amit Varma]: what do you have to do? How long did it take you? What is the work like? Do you get disheartened?
[Amit Varma]: And then mentally, how do you approach it?
[Guest]: So if you are studying Indian history in the 19th or the 20th century, and to a certain
[Guest]: degree, the 18th century, chances are you're going to be in one of two or three places,
[Guest]: including the National Archives of India or Teen Murthy, the Nehru Memorial Museum and
[Guest]: Library in Delhi. And I was in both places because Naoroji's papers, so when Naoroji
[Guest]: died, there was a collection of probably maybe 50,000 documents in Naoroji's collection.
[Guest]: And there's a very kind of long history of what happens to those papers after he dies.
[Guest]: They're kept in Bombay and they rot away and every 10 years or so someone will fish them
[Guest]: out and see what's there and make a catalog. And there's a attempt to catalog and publish
[Guest]: the papers, but it ultimately falls through. Eventually, they move to Pune and there's
[Guest]: a scholar there called R. P. Patwardhan who spends, he's told by someone called R. P.
[Guest]: Masani, who was Naoroji's first biography. He was told by Masani that, look, it'll take
[Guest]: you a few years, just go through the papers, show me, tell me what is good to publish in
[Guest]: a selected volume. And it took the rest of R. P. Patwardhan's life, it took him 20 odd
[Guest]: years to go through the papers and cull out collections for publication. And eventually
[Guest]: from Patwardhan's residence, they get transported to the National Archives in Delhi in the 1960s.
[Guest]: And by this point in time, what had originally been a collection of about 50,000 documents
[Guest]: when Naoroji died, had whittled down to maybe around 40 to 30,000 documents. And by the
[Guest]: time I got there, probably 30,000, you know, maybe a little bit more. So what we have over
[Guest]: here is a very clear track record of loss, which is true across the board in Indian archives
[Guest]: and records. Because of the climate, because of bad record keeping, because of, you know,
[Guest]: people just throwing away their collections, a lot of stuff gets lost. And Naoroji is actually
[Guest]: one of the best cases of preservation that we have, because at least here the collection
[Guest]: is in, you know, the order of tens of thousands, right? If you look at someone like Ranade,
[Guest]: we have a handful of his letters, right? If you look at W.C. Banerjee, the first president
[Guest]: of the Congress, we have basically nothing. I mean, someone had his letters up until 1940,
[Guest]: published a few in a not terribly good book, and that's it. We never hear anything after
[Guest]: that about what happened. So India's had a very shoddy track record of archival preservation.
[Guest]: And at least with the Naoroji papers, that record was much better. So a lot had been
[Guest]: lost, yes, but the vast majority had been preserved. It was not in a very good state
[Guest]: of preservation. So when I got to the National Archives, and I think that was the year 2011
[Guest]: to start my research, you know, I was taken to a room and said, here's the catalogue,
[Guest]: you know, tell me what you want, basically. So, you know, only when I got to the archives
[Guest]: did I discover that there are these 30,000 documents, right? And, you know, I thought
[Guest]: I might be in the National Archives for a few months. I ended up being there for about
[Guest]: two years, and I only got through about half of the collection. So there's another half
[Guest]: that I haven't even seen. But, I mean, one of the nice things about doing archival work
[Guest]: in India, which you do not get at, say, like a British library or archives in America,
[Guest]: is that if you show to the archivists that you're there for the long run, and, you know,
[Guest]: you are, you know, an honest and committed scholar, they give you certain privileges
[Guest]: that you would not otherwise enjoy in other facilities. So I started working very closely
[Guest]: with some of the archivists and saying, you know, I found this document, can you make
[Guest]: sure it gets preserved properly, because otherwise it will fall apart. And over time, at least
[Guest]: I was lucky enough to build up a relationship of trust with them that they allowed me to
[Guest]: actually go into the back room and get material myself. So I didn't have to worry for, you
[Guest]: know, about waiting for someone to deliver the papers for me, I could go in the back
[Guest]: and get the material myself. And that definitely helped me in the sense of understanding what
[Guest]: the papers were like, what it's like to go through someone's life collection and how
[Guest]: it's organized, and where there are discrepancies and where there's too much material where
[Guest]: there's too little material. So I mean, to answer your question, at least of methodology,
[Guest]: I, you know, I think the author Robert Carroll was onto something when he said, you know,
[Guest]: you have to go through everything, you have to turn every page. And of course, you know,
[Guest]: in a PhD program, you don't necessarily have that luxury, because you eventually have to
[Guest]: graduate. And I definitely took much longer than I should have, I took eight years, and,
[Guest]: you know, I should not have taken that long. But I tried to get as close to that as possible.
[Guest]: And I think in the ultimate end, it was very helpful. I mean, perhaps 80% of the material
[Guest]: I collected, I never used in the book. But it helped me kind of create an overall structure
[Guest]: of where this individual's life was going. And it ultimately will help me as I write
[Guest]: my next books as well.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and Caro, of course, has taken more than 40 years over his Lyndon Johnson biography,
[Amit Varma]: which I think the sixth volume will be out sooner. So that was so I'm glad you didn't
[Amit Varma]: follow his example that seriously. And the second part of the question, then, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when you begin, how do you sort of approach it? Do you have a preset narrative in your
[Amit Varma]: mind that kind of changes as you go along? Or do you try to just sort of put yourself
[Amit Varma]: in the moment that a document is from and try to figure it out from there? You know,
[Amit Varma]: how did the book mutate and take shape in your head?
[Guest]: Yeah, so when I started the project, you know, I read the little material on Naroji that
[Guest]: was around beforehand. I mean, the first biography, as I mentioned, for Naroji was written by
[Guest]: Rustom Masani, R.P. Masani. And it was written in 1939. And it's a great book in the sense
[Guest]: that it's far more comprehensive than mine in terms of, you know, wanting to know about
[Guest]: Naroji's life. It's 400 odd pages. He had access to material that was gone and lost
[Guest]: by the time I had the chance to look at the material. But it is ultimately colored by
[Guest]: the politics of the time. I mean, Masani was a moderate, and he was writing in a way to
[Guest]: try to show Naroji as kind of a moderate, loyalist leader, in that sense, somewhat separate
[Guest]: from Gandhi. And he tried to hold up Naroji as a model of what nationalism was like before
[Guest]: it took this kind of break from, you know, some sense of British loyalism, you know,
[Guest]: this difference that took place after the Puran Swaraj Declaration was made by the Congress
[Guest]: in 1929, 1930. And so, you know, I went into the archives with kind of this literature
[Guest]: showing Naroji as being quite a moderate leader, ultimately a loyalist, not a terribly radical
[Guest]: leader. And again, I think the most important thing I gained from reading his private correspondence
[Guest]: was helping me get away from that narrative. I mean, ultimately, yes, Naroji, during the
[Guest]: course of his life, made several declarations talking about how he was loyal to British
[Guest]: rule. You know, he was a proud member of the British Empire. But at the same time, he was
[Guest]: making completely contradictory statements. He was talking about British rule being evil.
[Guest]: If you read his private correspondence with certain people, he's talking about British
[Guest]: rule in quite condemnatory terms. I mean, he's talking about how British rule was responsible
[Guest]: for mass famine, and people were being killed in the millions because of the policies that
[Guest]: were being pursued or not pursued by the British. So, you know, it kind of evolved, in my sense
[Guest]: at least, a question of what does it mean to be loyal? So you can say that you are a
[Guest]: loyal member of, you know, the Empire, you're loyal to the Queen or the King or whatever,
[Guest]: but what does that mean? And ultimately, you know, I kind of understood Naroji's loyalism
[Guest]: as a bit of a tactic, and a way to kind of undercut a lot of the elements of, you know,
[Guest]: nefarious colonial policy. You know, he said, he and other early nationalists kind of built
[Guest]: up this narrative of British rule should be this, it should be X, right? But in reality,
[Guest]: we have Y. British rule should be something about equality, democratic rights, some sort
[Guest]: of progressive impulse. But in reality, you know, what you had in India was this very
[Guest]: reactionary, undemocratic, fiercely authoritarian rule where, you know, progressive, any sense
[Guest]: of progressive policy was completely absent, right? I mean, it was very derogatory towards
[Guest]: Indians, it didn't really support education. So, you know, the idea of British rule was
[Guest]: ultimately, you know, not British rule. It was some kind of idealized conception that
[Guest]: involved separating yourself 99% from actual British rule. So, in many ways, it was kind
[Guest]: of a tactic, and that helped me kind of separate my particular view on Naroji from, say, what
[Guest]: Massani or others had written about beforehand. And, you know, this is important, at least
[Guest]: from the standpoint of writing history. Whenever you investigate an individual, what someone
[Guest]: writes and publishes in public is obviously very different from what they're saying in
[Guest]: private or writing in private. And this only really comes across when you're able to do
[Guest]: sustained archival research. I mean, again, not something like what Caro has done. I can't
[Guest]: afford to take 40 years. But, you know, if you put several months or perhaps years into
[Guest]: it, you gain a familiarity with someone's life and you're able to discern what the real
[Guest]: meanings were.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the things that strikes me, especially about how we view history today,
[Amit Varma]: is that we look for simplistic narratives, and especially we make these harsh binaries.
[Amit Varma]: While the fact is that someone who's been in public life for decades, as Naroji was,
[Amit Varma]: will inevitably contain multitudes. And also what seems to happen, and what you've charted
[Amit Varma]: out very well in your book, is that at different stages of his life, and you, of course, divided
[Amit Varma]: his career into sort of three broad stages, but at different stages of his life, he's
[Amit Varma]: responding to incentives. And a lot of the moderating statements come from that, like
[Amit Varma]: in that initial theoretical phase, where he comes up with a drain theory. And because
[Amit Varma]: he needs to be taken seriously, he can't take a radical tone. So he's got to sort of be
[Amit Varma]: moderate there. Similarly, when he's standing for parliament, of course, he's got to gain
[Amit Varma]: and again, proclaim his loyalty. And once that is done, of course, he's, you know, towards
[Amit Varma]: the end of his life, he's a little more radicalized. Let's start by sort of talking about, at this
[Amit Varma]: point, the early phase of his life, which was quite interesting to me, because even
[Amit Varma]: his early years, like, of course, he leaves Bombay when he's 30, when he goes to London.
[Amit Varma]: But even in that time, he seems to have lived a fairly rich life, been a community leader,
[Amit Varma]: you know, especially in something like, speaking of feminism, starting girls schools, all of
[Amit Varma]: that. Tell me a bit about those early days in Bombay and what his background is, like
[Amit Varma]: he is, of course, from this Parsi priestly family, which had once seen much better days,
[Amit Varma]: but is relatively impoverished when he comes and he's expected to join the priesthood.
[Amit Varma]: And you've spoken about how, you know, when he's three, his father dies, and that probably
[Amit Varma]: saves him from a life of priesthood. And even though he does a little bit of early training,
[Amit Varma]: but otherwise, you know, so tell me a bit about the Bombay of those days and Naoroji
[Amit Varma]: growing up and what was the sort of environment around him, which shaped him and which shaped
[Amit Varma]: his thinking about the empire?
[Guest]: So if we want to talk about Bombay in the early 1800s, we automatically have to think
[Guest]: about the places where people were coming from, right? I mean, Bombay, as this immigrant
[Guest]: center was drawing in people from all across Western India, and in Naoroji's case, the
[Guest]: place his family came from was Navsari and Dharampur. Navsari was a very old Parsi settlement.
[Guest]: You know, there still is a relatively large Parsi population there. And Naoroji's family
[Guest]: was from a priestly line. You know, they could actually trace the descent right back to the
[Guest]: first priest, the first Zoroastrian priest who settled in Navsari. And so, you know,
[Guest]: it's kind of funny, the people in Navsari who still believe that Naoroji was born there.
[Guest]: And if you go to Navsari today, you will see a Naoroji birthplace. It's a very old house.
[Guest]: And, you know, ever since the early 1900s, people have believed that Naoroji was born
[Guest]: there. Even Gandhi thought that Naoroji was born there. And he went and paid a pilgrimage
[Guest]: to that site in the 1920s during non-cooperation. Naoroji wasn't born there. He was born in
[Guest]: Bombay. And he was born out of this kind of poor migrant perspective. I mean, his parents
[Guest]: had left Gujarat in probably the year 1824, 1823. And at that moment in time, there was
[Guest]: a famine in parts of Gujarat. So there's a good chance that his family was impelled to
[Guest]: move because of the real specter of poverty. And that was the same reason that was pushing
[Guest]: people, Parsis, Gujaratis, you know, Maharashtrians, Konkanis, from all across Western India into
[Guest]: this new commercial entrepreneur. So Bombay was growing by leaps and bounds. In the year
[Guest]: that Naoroji is born, 1825, the Maidan, what is now Azad Maidan, was covered with tents
[Guest]: of people who were living there who had just migrated from famine tracts. So it's a city
[Guest]: that's growing every day. And you get the sense of a city that's really kind of in formation.
[Guest]: It was also a very kind of rough and tumble place at this point in time. I mean, this
[Guest]: is before, you know, the grand colonial buildings that were constructed that we think of when
[Guest]: we associate that particular era of Bombay. So it was not an easy place to live in. I
[Guest]: mean, if you read descriptions of Bombay from this era, people talk about wide sewers, you
[Guest]: know, that basically would lap up on the doorsteps of people. Trash was a huge problem. The water
[Guest]: that you drank was muddy and there was a good chance that it would kill you. So it was not
[Guest]: a great place to live in from the standpoint of the vast majority of people. But I think
[Guest]: that the important thing for Naoroji and many others in his generation who grew up to be
[Guest]: important political leaders, is that they recognize the power of the diversity of the
[Guest]: city. I mean, unlike any other city in India at this point in time, you had people coming
[Guest]: from all walks of life and they were all living right next to each other. So the region of
[Guest]: Bombay that he grew up in, an area called Khadak, is located right next to an area called
[Guest]: Israeli Mohalla, which is where, you know, members of the Beni Israeli community lived.
[Guest]: It's next to a very large Muslim district, today's Bendi Bazaar. And just to the north
[Guest]: of it, you have very rich Anglo-Indians, Pisces, Jews, British individuals living in places
[Guest]: like Baikala, which were fashionable in that day. So he got a very strong flavor of kind
[Guest]: of this cosmopolitan diversity. And this played a really important role in his early activities.
[Guest]: I mean, he was admitted into a school at a very young age. And as you mentioned, you
[Guest]: know, the fact that his father passed away soon probably saved him from a priestly career.
[Guest]: And he instead goes into a free school that was a quite novel experiment in this era.
[Guest]: Free schooling was not common anywhere in the world really at this point in time, 1830s.
[Guest]: And that really commits him to a life of public service because he realizes, at least he says
[Guest]: so later on when he writes about this later in life, he realized from a very early age
[Guest]: that he owed something to the general public. They had paid for him getting as good an education
[Guest]: as you possibly could in Bombay at this time. And he was learning from British teachers.
[Guest]: He was learning from Indian teachers. He was reading Shakespeare. He was reading, you know,
[Guest]: the latest science and philosophy coming from Europe. So, you know, he received a very well-rounded
[Guest]: education and as importantly, it was in the English language. So he grew up speaking English
[Guest]: fluently and being able to write in English fluently in addition to Gujarati. And he probably
[Guest]: knew some Hindustani and Marathi as well. So that really set him on kind of this course
[Guest]: of needing to pursue a public career. And so he attends Elphinstone College. He kind
[Guest]: of widens his intellectual horizons more at this point in time because the professors
[Guest]: there are quite progressive in this era. You know, even the British people who are teaching
[Guest]: are very forward-looking and kind of freely associated with Indians and support their
[Guest]: reformist efforts. And ultimately, after he leaves college, he decides to join Elphinstone
[Guest]: as a teacher and he rises through the ranks quite quickly and becomes the first ever Indian
[Guest]: appointed to the rank of full professor in a colonial college in India. So, you know,
[Guest]: from this very early age, he is already marked out for success and, you know, kind of he's
[Guest]: a symbol of change in many ways. I mean, he was this very poor individual who's now at
[Guest]: the very top of Indian society. And this impels him, you know, this whole experience of, you
[Guest]: know, getting a kind of a very liberal education, feeling responsible to the public, pushes
[Guest]: him to adopt progressive causes. And one of them, again, was female education. You know,
[Guest]: in the 1850s, no Indian community had a strong suit with female education, including the
[Guest]: Pisces. The Pisces were almost as reactionary as any other community in India at this point
[Guest]: in time. And Naorochi, to his credit, gets a group of fellow Indians, not just Pisces,
[Guest]: but also Gujaratis and Maharashtrians, also gets them together, forms a network of indigenous
[Guest]: schools for girls and persists in getting their parents to send girls to schools in
[Guest]: spite of threats, in spite of, you know, editorials against them, verbal abuse. And what starts
[Guest]: as a very unpromising venture grows into an experiment where hundreds and hundreds of
[Guest]: Indian girls are being educated by the mid-1850s. And this is an unqualified success. So he
[Guest]: really kind of helps turn the table on orthodox thought at this point in time.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I was struck by a couple of strands here. One was his passion for education, not
[Amit Varma]: just self-education. And you've actually done another really interesting thing that I liked
[Amit Varma]: in your book, where when I read the biographies of people, I want to know what are the kind
[Amit Varma]: of books that they read. And, you know, you've got a little list of that. And obviously,
[Amit Varma]: they're all freely available on the internet, because they're, you know, so I kind of looked
[Amit Varma]: up a couple of them. And it was quite, quite sort of interesting to try and figure out
[Amit Varma]: what those strands might have been. And he takes education so seriously that at one point
[Amit Varma]: towards the end of his life, you quote him as saying, quote, several honors came to me
[Amit Varma]: during my lifetime, but no other title created in me that sense of pride, which I felt in
[Amit Varma]: being known as a professor, stop quote. And as you point out, he was, of course, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the first Indian to be made a full professor, even the sort of the two people he really
[Amit Varma]: admired, you pointed out at Elphinstone, Bal Gangadhar Shah, Sri Jambekar and Navroji Fardunji
[Amit Varma]: were assistant professors at the time. So he was sort of the first. The other strand
[Amit Varma]: that struck me and, you know, very often, I think what happens is that when men get
[Amit Varma]: into women's rights, they get into women's rights, but they get into it looking at women
[Amit Varma]: as instrumental to the world of men. And Navroji actually went beyond that. So you've got a
[Amit Varma]: passage here, which I'll quote, quote, like Kaikhoshru Harmasi, Navroji believed that,
[Amit Varma]: quote, good and educated mothers only will raise good and educated sons, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: But he also possessed notably progressive views on female education, arguing that it
[Amit Varma]: was a fundamental pillar for establishing gender equality. Indians, he argued, would
[Amit Varma]: one day, quote again, Navroji's words, understand that women had as much right to exercise and
[Amit Varma]: enjoy all the rights, privileges and duties of this world as man, each working towards
[Amit Varma]: a common good, stop quote. And this seems remarkably sort of progressive. And it was
[Amit Varma]: clearly a cause he cared about, because like you said, he started schools for first Parsi
[Amit Varma]: girls and then Maharashtrian Hindu girls, and then Muslim girls. And it was something
[Amit Varma]: that he cared deeply about. Also, give me a sense of, you know, he founded many organizations,
[Amit Varma]: he was part of many organizations, notably, what you call as Young Bombay. Tell me a bit
[Amit Varma]: about Young Bombay and his other community work. He also founded a Gujarati newspaper
[Amit Varma]: called Rast Guftar, for which he continued sending dispatches even when he was abroad.
[Amit Varma]: And all of this before he's turned 30, because he leaves Bombay when he's turned 30. So what's
[Amit Varma]: going on? How is such a young man so incredibly active and already a leader in his community
[Guest]: at such a young age?
[Guest]: So what you said about education really being kind of a hallmark of his career, I think
[Guest]: can be applied to pretty much all the nationalist leaders of this early era, this kind of pre-Gandhian
[Guest]: era. It's written all throughout the narratives of, you know, anyone, you can pick Ranade,
[Guest]: Gokhale, all the way down to people who are less known. I mean, you know, recently in
[Guest]: my research, I've been coming across articles written in Modern Review by a lot of people
[Guest]: who are not very familiar to us nowadays. And education is always that theme. Education
[Guest]: is the key for uplifting Indian society. And, you know, I think the reason why education
[Guest]: was so important for both Naoroji and these other leaders is that there was a general
[Guest]: understanding that India was at a very low point in its history. Right. I mean, most
[Guest]: people, of course, would have no point of reference. They would not be able to understand
[Guest]: how rich the rest of the world was in comparison to India. But they understood a sense of what
[Guest]: the type of poverty India was experiencing through oral narratives of, you know, parents
[Guest]: or grandparents talking about how at one point in time there was this very prosperous, you
[Guest]: know, trade in cottons, in cotton goods, through understanding that poverty was increasing
[Guest]: dramatically just through the spate of famines, just through the fact that so many people
[Guest]: were pouring into the city of Bombay due to terrible conditions in the countryside. So
[Guest]: at this point in time, with so much evidence of poverty around you, education was really
[Guest]: the one tool you had for betterment. And it was also one of those areas which the colonial
[Guest]: government obviously exercised control, but you had enough space to also exercise your
[Guest]: own agency. So, you know, the British officials at this time would talk a lot about how Indians
[Guest]: need to embrace Western education and, you know, they're so ignorant and they're so backward,
[Guest]: but they wouldn't really lift a finger for that. Right. I mean, if you look at the amount
[Guest]: of money that the government of Bombay was paying for Indian education at this point
[Guest]: in time, it's a few hundred rupees. It's not much. Right. I mean, it's terribly low. So
[Guest]: Indians kind of filled the gap. And so I think there were many reasons why Naoroji was motivated
[Guest]: to take on these educational activities just by surveying the condition of people around
[Guest]: them and realizing that he himself had grown up in such an impoverished background. So
[Guest]: there was, you know, struggle makes people all the more motivated to undertake such work.
[Guest]: And this theme of betterment and reform through education was something that, again, just
[Guest]: propelled young Bombay from its very start. And a very similar dynamic worked in Bengal
[Guest]: with young Bengal, you know, one or two decades beforehand. So there really was an idea that,
[Guest]: you know, something was wrong. The best way to help India to provide some sort of self-help
[Guest]: was education. And education could provide reform in three crucial aspects, religious
[Guest]: reform, social reform, and finally, political reform. And these three spheres of reform
[Guest]: are completely linked. You know, it was impossible to think of one type of reform throughout
[Guest]: the other. And these three pillars of reform, therefore, became kind of the foundation upon
[Guest]: which all these different organizations that Naoroji helped to found in Bombay in the 1840s
[Guest]: and 1850s, you know, come into life. So, you know, he helps establish learned societies.
[Guest]: As you mentioned, he helps establish a Gujarati language newspaper, which is explicitly for
[Guest]: the purpose of disseminating education and talking about the need for reform, not just
[Guest]: within the Parsi community, but within the wider Gujarati reading public. He takes part
[Guest]: in the first formal political organization, the Bombay Association in 1851, 1852. So it's
[Guest]: a very well-rounded attempt to kind of think about how Indian society needed to be reformed
[Guest]: and changed in reference to, you know, impetus from the West, but also in reference to what
[Guest]: Indians themselves thought about what was wrong and what the situation was like under
[Guest]: colonialism. And there definitely was a very radical streak in all of this also. You know,
[Guest]: I mentioned in my book how people like Naoroji were influenced by a generation of quite radical
[Guest]: Maharashtrian thinkers from the 1840s who talked about colonialism being terrible and
[Guest]: wrote about it publicly and talked about something like a drain of wealth well before, you know,
[Guest]: Naoroji popularized the term. So all these different forms of impetus, you know, explain
[Guest]: how young Bombay took place and why it took place at that particular point in time.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, just on a tangent to use a phrase which has possibly become overused these days,
[Amit Varma]: but is there a sense of what is the idea of India, if there is an idea of India, or what
[Amit Varma]: are the ideas of India that are floating around in the ether which, you know, Naoroji can
[Amit Varma]: sort of imbibe and, you know, take further?
[Guest]: Absolutely. Yeah. I mean, you know, depending on what sources you're looking at, India still
[Guest]: could be, you know, it still could include Afghanistan, it could include Singapore, it
[Guest]: could include what, you know, what was called the East Indies in the sense of what we now
[Guest]: know as Indonesia and Malaya. And certainly, since there were Indian populations in all
[Guest]: of these places, there was an understanding of, you know, India validly being a part of
[Guest]: these regions. But there definitely is a sense that, you know, the subcontinent as we think
[Guest]: of it, you know, everything south of the Himalayas and the Hindu Kush, being India, that sense
[Guest]: is definitely coming into play. I mean, when you read the newspapers from this era, people
[Guest]: are talking about what's going on in Bengal, what's going on in Madras, they're also talking
[Guest]: about what's going on in Ceylon. And, you know, eventually, by the time of the mutiny,
[Guest]: parts of North India gather people's interest. But there definitely is a sense that, you
[Guest]: know, there is this kind of contiguous unit. I mean, yes, there's a great degree of diversity
[Guest]: in it, but there's a certain commonality. And there already is the idea that, you know,
[Guest]: we should, you know, think about what Bengalis are thinking about, because ultimately, you
[Guest]: know, we're part of the same milieu. We should exchange letters with whatever political association
[Guest]: is taking place in Madras, because ultimately, their concerns are very similar to what we're
[Guest]: talking about also. So, you know, there was, I think, a certain sense of cultural cohesion
[Guest]: happening. And, you know, we can't discredit the, you know, the role of at least British
[Guest]: colonial administration in this process. I mean, the fact that all of these places were
[Guest]: under British colonial administration, obviously got people talking about how they could jointly
[Guest]: together campaign for better rights towards the same government.
[Amit Varma]: And just looking at what sort of shapes Naoroji's personality and his approach to dealing with
[Amit Varma]: the British, the famous moderate approach, quote unquote, so to say, you know, how big
[Amit Varma]: a role did the contingency of just the environment around him in Bombay play in that? Because
[Amit Varma]: it strikes me like there's one passage where you write, quote, as a student, Naoroji was
[Amit Varma]: exposed to a constant tussle between a miserly government and Indian stakeholders demanding
[Amit Varma]: more resources and better funding. He did not have to look far beyond the classroom
[Amit Varma]: walls to observe the many yawning gaps between imperial rhetoric and reality, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And the sense that I got from your chapter on this phase of his life is that number one,
[Amit Varma]: whatever empire might be, at a personal level, like you said, the British teachers he encounters
[Amit Varma]: at Elphinstone are very progressive and, you know, different from what the establishment
[Amit Varma]: is like. Plus, there are other British people in power who take an interest in him, who
[Amit Varma]: try to help him out in various ways, which to some extent could, you know, explain the
[Amit Varma]: fact that he isn't a radical and thinking in terms of breaking away. Instead, he wants
[Amit Varma]: to continue doing and he does for the rest of his life, what he's learned to do in these
[Amit Varma]: early years in Bombay, that if you want to change something, say, if you want more funding
[Amit Varma]: for schools, you petition, you know, you try to take legal ways, you send a petition, you
[Amit Varma]: try to talk to sort of all of these people, you know, how contingent is the background
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, how you grow up and these sort of influences and what you later on go on
[Amit Varma]: to do, like, obviously, you've also looked at other historical figures, like, say, a
[Amit Varma]: Tilak or a Bipin Chandrapal on one end, and, you know, maybe a Gokhale and a Ranade at
[Amit Varma]: the more moderate end, you know, his fellow Parsi, Feroz Shah Mehta, for example, does
[Amit Varma]: that make, does that kind of background and all of that sort of make a difference in what
[Amit Varma]: you do for the rest of your life, you think?
[Guest]: I think it plays a very large role. You know, towards the end of his life, Naoroji was rightly
[Guest]: criticized by many radical nationalists as being too unwilling to give up this idea that
[Guest]: the British people themselves were beneficent. Ultimately, they were on the side of justice
[Guest]: and only if you tried hard enough, you would you would get what you what you deserved and
[Guest]: what you demanded. And that sentiment, I think, stems to a large degree from what you said,
[Guest]: his upbringing in Bombay. He was around a lot of relatively progressive minded Britons,
[Guest]: you know, people who believed in, obviously, the British Empire, but at the same time,
[Guest]: were critical of it and did make an honest attempt to help people like Naoroji. So there
[Guest]: was a definite sense that, you know, the system as it was in Bombay had certain advantages
[Guest]: and the British British rule, you know, even though it had all these terrible flaws, at
[Guest]: least that progressive impulse was there. And, you know, if you if you just if you pushed
[Guest]: and prodded enough and if you try to convince people enough, you know, they'd come around
[Guest]: to your viewpoint. And that was something very difficult for Naoroji to let go of. I
[Guest]: mean, by the time he's 80, he's just about wrestling with this idea that, you know, maybe
[Guest]: all of this is wrong and, you know, ultimately something like Swaraj, where you're completely
[Guest]: separate from the British Empire, might be a possibility. And again, for someone like
[Guest]: Tilak or Bipin Chandra Pal or others, this idea, they had thrown out the window many
[Guest]: decades ago. Right. I mean, they had already realized that this sense of British justice
[Guest]: was more illusion than fact. And so it was much easier. They had made this realization
[Guest]: much earlier in life. Naoroji, since he had a relatively positive experience with many
[Guest]: of these figures and since the figures in his life who were British were more progressive
[Guest]: in many ways, did not have this opportunity. You know, so I think that's that's one ground
[Guest]: which we can definitely criticize Naoroji for not seeing, you know, a more holistic
[Guest]: perspective on what the British public was like or, you know, interrogating this idea
[Amit Varma]: of what British justice meant.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, at 30, so till 30, there have been sort of these two strands that I see
[Amit Varma]: in Naoroji's life. One is that he's intensely into education and he's a math whiz. You know,
[Amit Varma]: if he was alive today, he'd be a quant or a serious economist. I mean, you know, some
[Amit Varma]: of that work is just remarkable. And that's on the one hand where he's on the track and
[Amit Varma]: massive academic success because hey, first Indian professor and all of that. The other
[Amit Varma]: track is he's doing things within society. He started all these girls schools and he's
[Amit Varma]: part of these organizations. He started this Gujarati newspaper. And then at 30, he gives
[Amit Varma]: it all up or not gives it all up, but leaves it for the moment and decides to go to England
[Amit Varma]: to basically work in a corporate job for the commas, you know, and strikes out on his own
[Amit Varma]: a couple of years later. But essentially, he ends up spending decades in England. Give
[Amit Varma]: me a sense of what's going through his head at this time. Like, what does he want? Why
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, these two things are so important to him being everything that he's doing in
[Amit Varma]: Bombay as part of Young Bombay and outside that and equally as an academic, you know,
[Amit Varma]: he's making such a difference here in Bombay. And yet he goes there and this is in fact
[Amit Varma]: the criticism that will come to him even later when he's, you know, settling down and wants
[Amit Varma]: to run for parliament after losing the first time and you point out in your book how all
[Amit Varma]: his friends including people in the Congress because the Congress is supporting him financially
[Amit Varma]: and morally and they're sort of with him but they're like, no, you come back here, we need
[Amit Varma]: you here. And he's still there. What does he want? This was very sort of interesting
[Amit Varma]: to me because it's not like he goes to England and he immediately gets into activism for,
[Amit Varma]: you know, a better India or whatever. So I was just trying to kind of figure out his
[Guest]: motivations here.
[Guest]: It's very tough to understand and figure out those motivations because so much of the source
[Guest]: material is lost. You know, amongst those 30,000 documents that I talked about, there's
[Guest]: nothing for this era. Most of the 30,000 documents come from after the year 1886 and we're in
[Guest]: the year 1855 when he decides to go out to England. So it's very tough to reconstruct
[Guest]: what his motives are. But we do know that his announcement to sail and go off to England
[Guest]: and give up everything that he had done in Bombay came as a complete shock to everyone.
[Guest]: So when his superiors at Elphinstone College learned that he has decided to quit and join
[Guest]: a commercial firm, they're so caught off guard. I mean, apparently the school principal says
[Guest]: to him, you know, what a fall. You know, what have you done? There are other officials in
[Guest]: the government who are so panicked by this that they actually use the telegraph to contact
[Guest]: the governor. And the telegraph had just been introduced into India at this point in time.
[Guest]: So they're using this newfangled technology because it's really urgent. What do we do?
[Guest]: This star teacher is now leaving and he's been such an important part of the urban fabric
[Guest]: in Bombay. What do we do? What we do know is that Naorochi was only expecting to be
[Guest]: in the United Kingdom for a few years. He wanted about two or three years leave from
[Guest]: Elphinstone and then he wanted to come back and teach. That, of course, never happened.
[Guest]: He ended up staying on in Great Britain and he pursued a career as a businessman. But,
[Guest]: you know, if we if we try to think of what's going on inside his mind, a few things come
[Guest]: to mind. I mean, first of all, by 1855, he's getting much more involved in political activities
[Guest]: and political activities in the direction of criticizing colonial rule. By this point
[Guest]: in time, the Bombay Association is established. There's kind of a, you know, a more forward
[Guest]: looking wing within the Bombay Association where people like Bawda Jilard or Naorochi
[Guest]: Fardunji are participating. And they're much more vocal in their criticism of British rule.
[Guest]: So what better can you do than to go to the heart of empire and see for yourself what's
[Guest]: going on there? You know, what what what is the heart of empire like and how how does
[Guest]: the you know, the whole political process work over there? And the second reason, again,
[Guest]: of why this would have been an attractive thing for Naorochi is that when he joins the
[Guest]: Kama Company, he's specifically going there to work in the cotton trade. And in this era,
[Guest]: the cotton trade was the big business for Bombay. I mean, opium has just started to
[Guest]: fade as being kind of this important, you know, component of the economy and cotton
[Guest]: was really coming in. And by being an Indian in Great Britain, you were kind of, again,
[Guest]: going against the tide. You were, you know, cotton was flowing out of India and enriching
[Guest]: Great Britain. Here you were an Indian going out to Great Britain in order to kind of reverse
[Guest]: that direction a little bit and, you know, help Indians acquire machinery by which they
[Guest]: can eventually build their own cotton mills and maybe take a chunk out of Lancashire's
[Guest]: profit. So I think it was exciting in that aspect also from him. And the last component
[Guest]: where I think it really plays an influential, an idea that really plays an influential role
[Guest]: in Naorochi's thought and his decision to go out to England is that at this time, there
[Guest]: is, you know, discussion about Indians being allowed to join the Indian Civil Service.
[Guest]: And again, the Indian Civil Service was this elite cadre, kind of the, you know, the origins
[Guest]: of what is now the IAS. And 99.9 percent, it was, it was, well, 100 percent at this
[Guest]: point in time, it was British. The people working at, you know, all rungs of power of
[Guest]: importance in the ICS were British. And through a system of civil service examinations, finally,
[Guest]: there was the possibility that Indians could be allowed to compete. And so Naorochi went
[Guest]: out to England in part in order to kind of help guide the first Indians who came out
[Guest]: to Great Britain in order to compete for the civil service exam. Because, again, in this
[Guest]: era, if you as an Indian wanted to join the civil service, you could not take an exam
[Guest]: in India. You had to, you know, shell out your life savings, sail halfway across the
[Guest]: world to Great Britain, spend upwards to two years studying in an extremely expensive,
[Guest]: cold foreign country with bad food, and only then, you know, maybe take the exam and, you
[Guest]: know, 50 percent chance that you might pass. So, you know, if you failed, you lost everything
[Guest]: and you had to return to Bombay or Calcutta or wherever, humiliate. So this was not an
[Guest]: easy prospect for anyone who wanted to undertake this effort. And Naorochi thought, you know,
[Guest]: as someone who is interested in political matters, why don't I go out there and, as
[Guest]: a professor, try to help people and help them get prepared for this exam? And that's initially
[Guest]: what he does. I mean, when he goes out to Great Britain, he joins this cotton firm of
[Guest]: the Kama family, but he's immediately distracted. He might have been a very bad businessman
[Guest]: in this aspect, in the sense that he's immediately distracted by political activities. He starts
[Guest]: to campaign for civil service reform. He joins as a professor in University College in London,
[Guest]: teaching Gujarati. And this puts him in touch with people like Henry Maine or other important
[Guest]: colonial officials who are sitting as examiners for the civil service exam. So Naorochi is
[Guest]: one examiner alongside Henry Maine and other important individuals. And so he's automatically
[Guest]: drawn into this political world that he could only see at a distance when he was sitting
[Amit Varma]: in Bombay.
[Amit Varma]: And I found it instructive to remind myself, and your book makes it easy to do so, that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, going to London in those days wasn't quite what it is today, that you just take
[Amit Varma]: a flight and you're there. It took weeks to get there. And London is a shitty city in
[Amit Varma]: those days. It's polluted, it's grotty, it's Charles Dickens' London, it's full of disease.
[Amit Varma]: It's a mess, life isn't easy. And you've got various parts in your book where you paint
[Amit Varma]: a very vivid picture of sort of the trouble Naorochi had in just adjusting there and why
[Amit Varma]: he became such a focal point of the community. At this point, it's time to actually sort
[Amit Varma]: of begin with what, in your book, you describe as the three phases of Naorochi's life. We've
[Amit Varma]: just reached the beginning of phase one, when he lands up in London. So let's take a quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break, and then we'll get into the meat and bones of it as soon as we are
[Amit Varma]: back.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Scene and the Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive. The Scene and the Unseen has been a labour of love for me. I've enjoyed putting
[Amit Varma]: together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe, and hopefully yours
[Amit Varma]: as well. But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off
[Amit Varma]: the show. Although The Scene and the Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really
[Amit Varma]: woken up to the insane engagement level of podcasts. I do many, many hours of deep research
[Amit Varma]: for each episode, besides all the logistics of producing the show myself. Scheduling guests,
[Amit Varma]: booking studios, paying technicians, the travel and so on. So well, I'm trying a new way of
[Amit Varma]: keeping this thing going, and that involves you. My proposition for you is this. For every
[Amit Varma]: episode of The Scene and the Unseen that you enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish
[Amit Varma]: lunch, whatever you feel it's worth. You can do this by heading over to sceneunseen.in
[Amit Varma]: slash support, and contributing an amount of your choice. This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation. Help keep this thing going. sceneunseen.in slash
[Amit Varma]: support.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and the Unseen. I'm chatting with Dinyar Patel on his excellent
[Amit Varma]: biography of Dadabhai Naoroji. And, you know, at this point, Naoroji has reached London
[Amit Varma]: and we have reached London with him. The year is 1855. And now begins sort of the first
[Amit Varma]: phase, or rather he moves towards the first phase of his career, which you describe as
[Amit Varma]: a theoretical phase, where he comes up with what is known as a drain theory. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, one of the interesting points you made here is you pointed out how Naoroji is often
[Amit Varma]: considered an economic nationalist, but you point out that economic nationalism and political
[Amit Varma]: nationalism for him kind of go together. They are so intimately enmeshed. So tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about the kind of work he does during this period. What is his thesis? What is his
[Guest]: solution?
[Guest]: Economic nationalism and political nationalism, at least in my perspective, and at least in,
[Guest]: you know, in light of Naoroji's career, were two sides of the same coin. Naoroji began
[Guest]: his interest in, began pursuing an interest in Indian poverty out of this question of
[Guest]: reform, government reform, and ultimately poverty becomes the rationale for political
[Guest]: reform in India. And I think there are a few reasons why, again, he starts to think about
[Guest]: poverty and reform at the same time. So, again, if you are in London in the late 1850s and
[Guest]: the early 1860s, you are in the biggest city of the world. You are in the most powerful
[Guest]: city in the world. As you mentioned, you're in a terrible city also, right? I mean, it's
[Guest]: horribly polluted. It's smelly. It's dirty. The Thames smells like sulfur. The food is
[Guest]: awful, of course. I mean, so it's a difficult place to be, but it's also it's a fascinating
[Guest]: place to be. It's kind of like Bombay today. I mean, it's, you know, it's both, you know,
[Guest]: dirty and smelly, but also very exciting and, you know, very, you know, it's an exciting
[Guest]: place to be in. And in this era, when Naoroji is in London, again, he realizes just how
[Guest]: rich, you know, in spite of all these terrible things about London, how rich Great Britain
[Guest]: is in comparison to India. You know, the country is booming. It's, you know, the world's most
[Guest]: prosperous country. There are factories everywhere. There's a large working class that's being
[Guest]: slowly empowered through political reform. There are politicians who are talking about
[Guest]: democratization. And at the same time, you know, being in London and Liverpool, which
[Guest]: was the other city he lived in, he was, you know, miles away from the places where all
[Guest]: the wealth of empire was dumped and distributed across the country. So when we think of the
[Guest]: drain of wealth, he was at the very end of the spigot. I mean, he saw the wealth that
[Guest]: had been drained out, you know, come to British shores and be disseminated through the banks
[Guest]: and bank accounts of various British individuals. So, you know, there's a very vivid kind of
[Guest]: understanding of how imperialism works when you're at the very heart of empire. And again,
[Guest]: the last reason for why this era is particularly important is what is going on around the empire
[Guest]: and globally at this moment. So, of course, in the early 1860s, you have the American
[Guest]: Civil War, which has an immediate global knockoff effect. All of a sudden, in one stroke, the
[Guest]: cotton that had been feeding this great industrial machine in Great Britain is cut off. It had
[Guest]: come from the American South. And there's this huge panic, right? People like Sven Beckert
[Guest]: have written about it in his book, Empire of Cotton. What do you do? You know, the cotton
[Guest]: that was sustaining your industrial prowess is no longer there. Well, eventually, India
[Guest]: became one of those places where cotton was was brought into to feed these, you know,
[Guest]: dark sustanic mills, so to speak, of of Great Britain. And Naroji's friends in Bombay and
[Guest]: he in London get extremely rich during this cotton boom during the American Civil War.
[Guest]: And as quickly as the cotton boom ends, they all go bankrupt. You know, Naroji goes bankrupt
[Guest]: because he loans out money to friends who turn out to, you know, not have been able
[Guest]: to pay him back. He was a bit too honest of a businessman in that regard. But automatically
[Guest]: you get this huge slump in Bombay, which eventually, you know, which has terrible consequences
[Guest]: in the countryside. I mean, it contributes to to famines in places like Kandesh and Gujarat
[Guest]: by the 1860s and 1870s. So there's one kind of big global shock, right, that kind of brings
[Guest]: home this idea of how the economy is linked together and how poverty and and prosperity
[Guest]: are again two sides of the same coin. The other big event that takes place, which again
[Guest]: Naroji is seeing from a distance, is the Orissa famine of 1867, 1868, where again, you know,
[Guest]: he he'd never stepped foot in Orissa at this point in time. But the reports that were coming
[Guest]: out of Orissa at this point were gruesome and terrible. One out of every three people
[Guest]: might have died. And as later investigations took place, it was realized that this was
[Guest]: largely preventable. I mean, there were boats with grain that could have easily been shipped
[Guest]: in. But, you know, the colonial officials, for various reasons, did not do it. And the
[Guest]: result is one million people dead. And so the the very first proper speech that Naroji
[Guest]: gives on the drain of wealth, he doesn't call it the drain of wealth at this point in time.
[Guest]: He doesn't even use the word drain, is kind of in reflection to these two particular moments
[Guest]: and especially the Orissa famine. I mean, he gives a speech in 1867. So the Orissa famine
[Guest]: is definitely very much on his mind. And he asks a question, you know, OK, so British
[Guest]: rule, we're told, is good. It's provided us with all these benefits, rule of law. It's
[Guest]: supposedly better than the chaos that was present in India before British rule. So you
[Guest]: have that. But at the same time, you have these terrible famines, whereas the life that's
[Guest]: secured through law and peace is ultimately being killed anyway, right, through terrible
[Guest]: famine. So what gives? What explains this contradiction? And that really is the impetus
[Guest]: for understanding Indian poverty in Naroji's mind. Why is, on one hand, British rule being
[Guest]: credited with giving these benefits to India, yet on the other hand, it's very clearly impoverishing
[Guest]: the country? Why is there this central contradiction? And as Naroji progresses through about two
[Guest]: decades of close economic analysis, he again sheds this view that British rule was beneficent,
[Guest]: that it ultimately was doing all of these good things. So these ideas that he had during
[Guest]: his first few speeches that, you know, some of the drain was justified, that the services
[Guest]: that the British were rendered were being paid back in part through the drain, he throws
[Guest]: these out the window. And he realizes that, no, the drain itself is a nefarious process.
[Guest]: And he realizes that, you know, the supposed benefits of British rule, like the railways,
[Guest]: irrigation systems, et cetera, are actually accelerating the drain. You know, with the
[Guest]: railways, you get the wealth out of places like Kandesh or Berar or Gujarat even quicker,
[Guest]: and you impoverish the people even quicker. So, you know, this is also where this whole
[Guest]: idea of radicalization kind of seeps in, this kind of ability to kind of discard your previous
[Guest]: notions and based on the facts and evidence before you, go in a more progressive political direction.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it kind of struck me, you've given an example of how in many of these early speeches,
[Amit Varma]: he's saying kind of fairly conciliatory things to the British, where his tone is extremely
[Amit Varma]: moderate, like at one point, you write, quote, somewhat incredibly, he believed that part of
[Amit Varma]: the drain was justified in exchange for the supposed political, moral and social benefits
[Amit Varma]: of British rule. It was inevitable that India had to sacrifice some of its wealth. And now,
[Amit Varma]: you quote, Navroji, if India is to be regenerated by England, India must make up its mind to pay
[Amit Varma]: the price, stop quote. But, you know, as time goes by, this changes to, for example, at one point,
[Amit Varma]: you know, speaking publicly, he says, quote, so far as my inquiries go at present, the conclusion
[Amit Varma]: I draw is that wherever the East India Company acquired territory, impoverishment followed
[Amit Varma]: their steps, stop quote. And he's far more scathing in private, you quote, something that he wrote to
[Amit Varma]: his friend, Bairamji Malabari, where he says, quote, these Englishmen cannot understand that
[Amit Varma]: the wealth that they carry away from this country is the whole and sole cause of our misery. They
[Amit Varma]: take away our bread, and then turn around asking us why we are not eating it, stop quote. So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, very biting in this private message. Now, one of the early economic analysis, as you've
[Amit Varma]: spoken about is where he tries to calculate what we would today call maybe the, you know,
[Amit Varma]: income per capita. And he figures out that every Indian subject to the empire is getting 27
[Amit Varma]: shillings, while the average income in the United Kingdom is about 33 pounds per head, and between
[Amit Varma]: 27 to 40 shillings, depending on how you want to cut it. And one of the things that I was fascinated
[Amit Varma]: in this chapter by is his incredibly sophisticated use of data. And this also sort of evolves, like
[Amit Varma]: you've, you know, spoken about how, you know, by the time he's finished the last of his papers on
[Amit Varma]: the subject, his economic analysis has developed in three distinct stages. I found this incredibly
[Amit Varma]: fascinating, because each of these stages is one using data generated by the British, and B,
[Amit Varma]: the analysis is far more sophisticated than anything the British can do. Tell me a bit about
[Guest]: that. So in this era, again, when you are trying to get proper data on India, you are in many ways
[Guest]: groping in the dark, it's very hard to get data at all, leave alone reliable data. So what the
[Guest]: British would do is at least for economic data, they would, you know, there'll be different people
[Guest]: around the country, and each district would tabulate approximately, you know, what was being
[Guest]: grown, how much revenue was being collected. And then that data was compiled at a national level.
[Guest]: But oftentimes, it was done in a very sloppy way. So if you wanted to, you know, get even the gross
[Guest]: domestic product, you know, it was done in a way where, you know, lots of inaccuracies were in
[Guest]: place, if you want to get, you know, the average earnings of particular places, oftentimes, you
[Guest]: just take earnings figures for particular districts and divide by the number of districts.
[Guest]: And as Naorochi pointed out, that's a flawed process, because each district was different,
[Guest]: you cannot compare Delhi with, you know, say, Tanna district, or what have you, it's a false
[Guest]: comparison. So there were many other people who, again, critical of the data, but only someone
[Guest]: like Naorochi, who, you know, by being in London had access to all of this data that was at the
[Guest]: India office, and also simultaneously had friends across the subcontinent who could give them
[Guest]: supplementary data, only someone like him was really able to, you know, kind of take a more
[Guest]: holistic view. So as you said, you know, he starts off with this original, you know, subset of
[Guest]: official data, and the picture presented is quite rosy. You know, there's a surplus of exports,
[Guest]: the economy is growing by X percentage, the amount of money that is being generated
[Guest]: through various goods being exported, like cotton, or what have you is very large.
[Guest]: But ultimately, when you put all these different pieces together, you realize that, you know,
[Guest]: the big components of your economy aren't that big at all, anywhere in the first place. I mean,
[Guest]: a lot of people by the 1870s and 1880s attacked Naorochi's economic arguments by saying,
[Guest]: how can you say India is growing poorer, whereas in Bombay, you have this huge mill industry that's
[Guest]: evolving? And certainly, yes, in Bombay, there was a very large mill industry. But ultimately,
[Guest]: if you look at the whole economy of India, it wasn't that big, right? I mean, you know,
[Guest]: you had 30 or 40 mills, and sure, it was, you know, creating a lot of wealth for a few Indians,
[Guest]: but the vast majority of the country was still agricultural, of course, right, and living in
[Guest]: rural areas of the country, which were being terribly impoverished. So it was kind of that
[Guest]: ability to kind of balance things out and look at the big picture that helps Naorochi interrogate
[Guest]: this data. And again, as he gains more friends around India, and as he himself goes on his own
[Guest]: tours throughout parts of Gujarat or Western India, he himself collects data, he revises it,
[Guest]: and he, by the end of his, you know, career as an economic thinker in the early 1880s,
[Guest]: presents a picture where he shows Punjab, which was thought to be the most prosperous
[Guest]: province of British India. It was also the part of British India which had British rule for the,
[Guest]: you know, the shortest period of time, only since the 1840s. He shows even that in Punjab,
[Guest]: the average person is living at bare subsistence levels. I mean, you know, if a famine came along,
[Guest]: they would be dead. So it's a really striking comparison that he makes between this, you know,
[Guest]: rosy pronouncement in the official circles of, you know, moral and material progress. There
[Guest]: were reports that the British government would issue every year on the supposed moral and
[Guest]: material progress of India, but the reality, as he discovered, was a very different picture.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I was kind of extremely struck by your, you know, description of the stages. Again,
[Amit Varma]: I'll, you know, quote from the book, quote, it indicates how Naoroji's economic analysis
[Amit Varma]: developed in three distinct stages, approximations based on scanty data such as land revenue as was
[Amit Varma]: undertaken in the wants and means of India, estimates based on rigorous analysis of official
[Amit Varma]: raw data seen in poverty of India, and finally, Naoroji's supplementation of this raw data with
[Amit Varma]: his own collected statistics and observations, enabling even more nuanced estimates and pointed
[Amit Varma]: refutation of government figures, stop quote. And then you speak about how, you know, the Punjab
[Amit Varma]: study where you pointed out where you said he, quote, analyzed production in Punjab through 21
[Amit Varma]: key agricultural commodities, 15 types of manufactured goods, and other activities
[Amit Varma]: such as mining and livestock, even taking into account marginal occupations such as fishing,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And I can't imagine what he would have made of Indian data today. Because in many ways,
[Amit Varma]: it is as confusing and obfuscatory and scattered as the data back then seems to have been. And now,
[Amit Varma]: and here's one thing that I find so fascinating about Naoroji, that he excels in so many different
[Amit Varma]: areas, which he combines into, you know, one stream of action, but it's not necessarily so.
[Amit Varma]: Number one, he is a numbers guy, who's actually crunched all this raw data figured out that the
[Amit Varma]: British conclusions are wrong. And he's, you know, he's done the rigorous analysis, and he's come to
[Amit Varma]: these his own conclusions. Two, he's skilled at rhetoric, so he can actually go out and talk about
[Amit Varma]: it, and present it and, you know, frame it in terms everyone can understand. Three, even before
[Amit Varma]: he actively enters politics, he's actually a very good politician in terms of making all the
[Amit Varma]: alliances he needs to make to get access to the data and to be able to speak at all these places.
[Amit Varma]: And four, he's enough of a policy wonk to now go from economic analysis to policy suggestion
[Amit Varma]: and say that, okay, this is a problem, they're bleeding us dry, this is what we need to do.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, do you have a comment on how remarkable it is that one man can combine all of
[Amit Varma]: these different facets? And also now tell me about sort of what is, after that, tell me what is a
[Amit Varma]: political conclusion that he then reaches from his economic analysis? It is quite remarkable that
[Guest]: someone, again, this elite individual, this somewhat anglicized, quite anglicized individual,
[Guest]: I should say, also had knowledge, such a deep knowledge of Indian agriculture that he could
[Guest]: identify different types of sugar, different types of soil, and point out where, you know, British
[Guest]: calculations were wrong, because, you know, they identified a different type of commodity
[Guest]: than what existed in actuality. So he definitely did his homework. And, you know, I think at this
[Guest]: point in time, again, he was just, he was a complete workaholic. His central focus of his
[Guest]: life was understanding this process of impoverishment in India. So pretty much every
[Guest]: activity he undertook was somehow connected with it. Whenever he went back to India, he would
[Guest]: obviously spend time with his family, he didn't spend nearly enough, but he would immediately go
[Guest]: and talk to officials and then head out to the countryside and go and look and see what's going
[Guest]: on on the ground. Now, with regard to the political aspect of the drain theory, if you look at
[Guest]: previous scholarship, most scholars have been quite puzzled by Naoroji's particular frame of
[Guest]: mind on the drain theory, because he ultimately talks about one source of the drain. I mean,
[Guest]: there were many sources of the drain, right? I mean, in terms of, you know, natural goods and
[Guest]: natural resources being taken out of the country, high land revenue, but he ultimately focuses on
[Guest]: one component that seems on the surface not terribly important, and that's the amount of
[Guest]: money that's paid for the civil service. So, you know, he calculates that about 33 million pounds,
[Guest]: which of course was a big amount in that day, was taken out of India every year and, you know,
[Guest]: was, you know, sent back to Great Britain. That was the actual number in numerical terms of the
[Guest]: drain of wealth. And of that, initially, he says only a small portion of that is the salaries that
[Guest]: are paid to these British officers, because ultimately those British officers retire,
[Guest]: or even if they stay in India, they send their earnings back to Great Britain to support family
[Guest]: members. But there's a reason for why Naoroji focused on this, because again, as I said,
[Guest]: politics and economics are two sides of the same coin in Naoroji's nationalism. The civil service
[Guest]: is this major political issue of this era. It's kind of the linchpin of Indian grievances,
[Guest]: because ultimately the civil servants are the ones that are kind of enforcing these very draconian
[Guest]: policies throughout India. So Naoroji and others had this idea that if you open up the civil
[Guest]: service to more Indians, and if Indians themselves are working for their own government,
[Guest]: those policies will change. Indians would not be beholden to the same imperial principles.
[Guest]: They would understand the country better. They, of course, spoke the languages. So by focusing
[Guest]: on that particular component, just the civil service, you could make your political point
[Guest]: very convincingly. And this was something that I think a lot of early historians didn't really
[Guest]: focus enough on. They asked, why fixate on this particular small component? And you see
[Guest]: throughout his writings that he, by the end of his career as an economic theorist, he doesn't
[Guest]: care anymore about what percentage of the drain of wealth comes from the civil service, paying
[Guest]: for the civil service. It doesn't matter. No matter what it is, it is what needs to be solved.
[Guest]: It itself is the source of all other aspects of the drain of wealth, because once you had Indians
[Guest]: in power, those other forms of drain, the drain of wealth would also dry up.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it struck even me while I was reading the book that, you know, I couldn't
[Amit Varma]: figure out at first that, okay, I understand the point he's made with the data that we are losing
[Amit Varma]: so much money, a quarter of our taxes are just going back to England and we are progressively
[Amit Varma]: getting impoverished by this. But why fixate on salaries of civil servants? And then it struck me
[Amit Varma]: and tell me if this sort of interpretation is correct, that he figures out that, okay,
[Amit Varma]: politically, what can I achieve? This is a reform that I can achieve politically,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore, I'm going to make this the focus. And I'm not going to focus about all the other
[Amit Varma]: diffused things that could solve the problem. And of course, the main thing that could solve
[Amit Varma]: the problem is the end of empire itself. He can't go for that. So this is the one achievable thing
[Amit Varma]: that he fixates on. But what is then fascinating to me is that he fixates on this for the rest of
[Amit Varma]: his life, basically, I mean, till the end of his career in England, that, you know, even when he
[Amit Varma]: is in parliament, which we'll talk about later, this is the one thing that he wants to do. It's
[Amit Varma]: like for 30-40 years, he's just fixated on getting Indians into the civil service. And you could
[Amit Varma]: argue that now we have an Indian civil service full of Indians, and it's not that much of an
[Amit Varma]: improvement. But leaving that aside, you know, it's kind of a fascinating period. What also
[Amit Varma]: I find really interesting here is this little detour he takes, where he concludes that, listen,
[Amit Varma]: you know, British India is not one monolithic mass. There are places like Bombay and Madras and all
[Amit Varma]: which they govern themselves, but there are all these princely states all around some 300 around
[Amit Varma]: the area of Bombay alone. And they have less interference. And very often, they don't have an
[Amit Varma]: English British civil service sitting there. And therefore, there is there is a better scope for
[Amit Varma]: comparing what governance across these two places are and figuring out if good governance can
[Amit Varma]: actually make a difference. And rather than theorize about it, he actually takes that step
[Amit Varma]: and becomes the Diwan of Baroda, you know, where for a couple of years, he gets his fellow policy
[Amit Varma]: wongs from the young Bombay days in and they try to do their own thing. And there is crazy politics
[Amit Varma]: where the previous cabinet still exists as a shadow cabinet while they are trying to do their
[Amit Varma]: things. And there are, you know, and there's a British guy there who's fighting with the king
[Amit Varma]: and the king tries to poison the British guy and it's mad fun. So tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: that kind of period and what was he trying to do really? I mean, was he trying to sort of prove a
[Amit Varma]: point that, hey, you know, A, we can govern well and B, if you govern properly, you'll get far
[Guest]: better outcomes. Is that the whole thing that he was on? Princely states in this era are extremely
[Guest]: interesting, you know, in terms of both the intrigues that are going on and also the potential
[Guest]: that they held for some sort of reform. I mean, when we think of princely states nowadays,
[Guest]: we think of reactionary old rajas who are holding on to power, anti-democratic. But the perspective
[Guest]: from the late 19th century was very different. They were recognized as being the last vestiges
[Guest]: of indigenous rule. In many cases, the rulers who are on the thrones in places like, say,
[Guest]: Baroda or Gondal were quite progressive. They took tentative steps towards political reform.
[Guest]: So, you know, Mysore, for example, set up a legislative assembly. So did Baroda. States
[Guest]: like Gondal were experimenting in things like compulsory education by the very early 20th
[Guest]: century. So these places were thought of as being almost political laboratories. These were the only
[Guest]: places you as an Indian could, in your country, exercise some real administrative control.
[Guest]: And it's for that reason that so many early Indian nationalists gravitate towards a few
[Guest]: princely states. I mean, again, actually Dutt served as a diwan. Naoroji served as a diwan.
[Guest]: Other individuals in the nationalist movement were constantly advising and were constantly in
[Guest]: touch with princely officials from Hyderabad, through states that are now in Gujarat,
[Guest]: through Rajputana states in eastern India as well. So they really kind of exercised the
[Guest]: imagination of early nationalists. And you're right. I mean, when Naoroji goes out to Baroda, it is
[Guest]: in many ways his attempt and the attempt of his young Bombay crowd, if you will, to kind of put
[Guest]: ideas into practice. Here's an ability to actually implement the reforms and see whether we're right
[Guest]: about, first of all, a drain of wealth existing in British territories that didn't really exist in
[Guest]: the quote-unquote native states because they were under the control of our own people and
[Guest]: whether or not government could be better when the people in charge were actually Indians.
[Guest]: Now, in any other era, in any other place, this might have been a pretty interesting and
[Guest]: potentially fruitful experience. Baroda in this period of time, 1873 through 1874, 1875,
[Guest]: is the exact opposite of that place. I mean, it was ruled by a man called Malharrao.
[Guest]: And as you had mentioned, Malharrao, the Gaikwad at this time, was in kind of a
[Guest]: deadly battle with the British resident, a man called Robert Fair, who was himself no angel.
[Guest]: He was kind of this very puritanical British officer who always tried to meddle in the affairs
[Guest]: of princely states. He caused chaos when he was posted in Sindh by scheming behind
[Guest]: the backs of various people. And when he goes to Baroda, he makes it his life's mission to
[Guest]: somehow take down the Gaikwad. And when he learns that Naoroji is coming to serve as Diwan,
[Guest]: a prime minister, he's livid. He regards Naoroji as being kind of a seditious traitor who's saying
[Guest]: all these terrible things about British rule. And he actually says that he will not allow
[Guest]: Naoroji to enter Baroda. I mean, think about this. I mean, a native state, an Indian princely state
[Guest]: where the British agent, who's not really in power, still says, you know, I will not allow
[Guest]: your Diwan to come into the territory of the state he's supposed to rule. It's quite incredible.
[Guest]: And so for the next one and a half years when Naoroji serves as Diwan, he tries on one level
[Guest]: to implement these reforms that he has been talking about. And at one level, it's very
[Guest]: successful. I mean, he and his colleagues from Bombay clean up the judiciary. They get rid of
[Guest]: practices like Nazarana, where people basically pay for, you know, judicial verdicts in their
[Guest]: favor. They come up with a proper civil and penal code. They reform the, you know, the economy of
[Guest]: the imperial household. They, you know, go through the country and revise the land rates, which were
[Guest]: quite high. But ultimately, none of this really sticks because the Maharaja, the Gaikwad,
[Guest]: was not fully committed to a program of reform. He wanted to kind of keep his cronies in power
[Guest]: and at the same time kind of play politics against Robert Fair, the resident. So Naoroji gets trapped
[Guest]: right in the middle. And many people at this point in time, you know, criticize him rightly for not
[Guest]: being politically very savvy. I mean, here's someone who, again, has lived his life for the
[Guest]: most part in an ivory tower. And now he's thrown into a very real politic environment where you
[Guest]: have these two kind of implacable foes against each other, fighting for political power. And
[Guest]: it gets so bad that, you know, in the, I think, November of 1874, Robert Fair, the resident,
[Guest]: is actually poisoned. He's poisoned by via some arsenic being slipped into his glass of pomelo
[Guest]: juice. And there was some, you know, glass shards and also in here. It's a huge scandal. And
[Guest]: eventually it's discovered that the Gaikwad of Baroda might have been behind this, which is
[Guest]: scandalous, right? I mean, you know, things have got that bad. And luckily, Naoroji resigns just
[Guest]: before the, you know, things go to the wall and the Gaikwad is removed. But ultimately, it's quite
[Guest]: a disappointing experience. I mean, Naoroji at one point kind of validates his idea that Indians,
[Guest]: if they are in power, can, you know, kind of implement their own reforms. And he always had
[Guest]: this idea that good government is no excuse for native government, indigenous government. And so
[Guest]: in that sense, it's validated. But at the same time, he realizes that Indians, when they're in
[Guest]: power themselves, are not always going to be these very selfless individuals who are out for helping
[Guest]: the fellow countrymen. They have their own motives when they're in power and their own
[Guest]: power dynamics. And the princely state system, you know, there's a reason why nationalists
[Guest]: eventually fall out of, you know, these princes fall out of favor with nationalists, especially
[Guest]: by the time of Gandhi's and Nehru's generation, because ultimately they are, you know, at one
[Guest]: element, they are unrepresentative and undemocratic leaders. I mean, it took a
[Guest]: Saiji Rao to kind of take that step of reforming. But ultimately, at the end of the day, Saiji Rao
[Guest]: still wanted to stay in power, right? And by Gandhi and Nehru's time, Indian nationalism had
[Guest]: moved beyond that stage where these princely rulers were already real political use to them.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, no. And it's also like you pointed out, the timing is just crazy that he actually goes in
[Amit Varma]: there and, you know, gets his great team together, makes a few changes. But the optics are terrible
[Amit Varma]: because the Indian guy tried to kill the British guy. So what are you going to talk about?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Now, the interesting thing after this is that at this point, he decides that I,
[Amit Varma]: you know, he moves on to the second phase, like he's done the theoretical phase. And this is sort
[Amit Varma]: of a transition, I guess, between the theoretical phase of the second phase, which is a political
[Amit Varma]: phase where he decides that, okay, I need to now get into British Parliament because it looks like
[Amit Varma]: that is the only way I'll be able to make a difference. And there is sort of, for the concept
[Amit Varma]: of this, there is some precedent, like at one point in your book, you write about Raja Ram Mohan Roy,
[Amit Varma]: quote, in 1828, Ram Mohan dispatched petitions to both houses of Parliament, protesting the
[Amit Varma]: company's intention to restrict membership in grand juries only to Christians, a matter that
[Amit Varma]: he vigilantly pursued in Westminster after sailing to Great Britain in 1830. Recognizing the broad
[Amit Varma]: public significance of his agitation against the Jury Act, Prasanna Kumar Tagore, a prominent
[Amit Varma]: Calcutta lawyer, hailed Ram Mohan as India's unofficial MP, stop quote. And you talk about
[Amit Varma]: how Naoroji decides that, okay, it's time, you know, enough of theory, enough of giving policy
[Amit Varma]: suggestions. And hey, the Baroda experiment didn't work. So the only way to really change things is
[Amit Varma]: to get into British Parliament. How outlandish is this at the time? Like at the time, how do people
[Amit Varma]: think about this? And what is his thinking behind it? And you know, what happens after this? Just
[Amit Varma]: take me a little bit through his thinking, because just to conceive of something like this seems so
[Guest]: audacious at one level. It is quite outlandish. But again, from the perspective of Indian nationalism
[Guest]: at this moment, you are searching for the weakest link, which is the reason why civil service and
[Guest]: civil service reform preoccupied Indians so much as well. It was the weakest link in the edifice of
[Guest]: British imperialism. Now that there were civil service exams, there was a chance for Indians
[Guest]: to compete as well. Similarly, Parliament, the British Parliament, was regarded accurately by
[Guest]: Indian nationalists as being the ultimate source of power. I mean, you had your viceroy, you had,
[Guest]: you know, the various officials throughout India. But ultimately, the people who they looked up to
[Guest]: was the British Parliament. You know, the Parliament would vote on a budget every year.
[Guest]: The Parliament would occasionally, you know, censure the Indian government if it did some
[Guest]: things that it didn't like. The Parliament had played a very important role under the company,
[Guest]: under, you know, the East India Company of being a very vocal critic. So yes, it was outlandish,
[Guest]: but it was the best option you had. You know, there was, you know, a 99 out of 100 chance that
[Guest]: you would fail, but at least it wasn't 100 out of 100, which was the case in any other aspect. So,
[Guest]: you know, at this phase, early Indian nationalism and the Congress, the Congress having just been
[Guest]: established in 1885, looked to Great Britain as the only possible source of hope. And if it meant
[Guest]: that an Indian would have to stand to get into Parliament, so be it. And Naoroji was in many
[Guest]: ways the perfect candidate to try this venture because he had lived in Great Britain for such a
[Guest]: long period of time. You know, he spoke English fluently, maybe because he was a Parsi, he might
[Guest]: have looked a little bit more like Gora, he might have looked a little bit more fair than other
[Guest]: Indians. So, you know, he probably had the best chance. And when he starts to campaign for
[Guest]: Parliament, or at least starts to think about campaigning for Parliament, he says, you know,
[Guest]: look, again, I've lived in this country in Great Britain for two or three decades off and on. I
[Guest]: know many of the important political leaders here. I've talked to members of the Liberal Party. I've
[Guest]: talked to members of the Conservative Party. And since India is a big political hot button issue,
[Guest]: maybe there's a chance. Naoroji is not the first Indian to run, to stand for Parliament. That honour
[Guest]: goes to a man called Lalmohan Ghosh. And I spent the first month of lockdown researching his
[Guest]: activities for the next book I'm writing. And Ghosh comes very close to winning. It's quite
[Guest]: remarkable. He stands in a place called Deptford, close by to Greenwich, and, you know, comes within,
[Guest]: you know, a few dozen votes of winning, but ultimately doesn't win. So the door is already
[Guest]: open a little bit. Okay, so, you know, there already are a few people who are starting to
[Guest]: think about standing for Parliament. And the way that Naoroji thinks that he would have an even
[Guest]: better chance of standing for Parliament is if he made his parliamentary campaign not just about
[Guest]: India. If you're a Briton living in this era, your vote is not going to be swayed based on what you
[Guest]: talk about India, right? I mean, most people have no clue about what's going on in India. They can
[Guest]: maybe identify it on a map, maybe they can't. But if you link Indian political issues with issues
[Guest]: that resonated with the average British individual, whether it was Irish Home Rule, the idea that
[Guest]: Ireland should have some sort of autonomy from Great Britain at this point in time, whether you
[Guest]: were talking about labor rights, the rights of people to unionize, the rights of women to vote,
[Guest]: then you could catch their attention. And so Naoroji starts to do this during his first campaign,
[Guest]: which takes place in 1886. I should mention that, you know, he had started to think about standing
[Guest]: for Parliament many years beforehand, from at least 1877 onward. But it's only in 1886 that
[Guest]: he really gets the first opportunity to stand. And the reason why he chooses that year is because
[Guest]: parliamentary reform had just taken place in Great Britain. So Indians were very keenly observing how
[Guest]: democratization was going on in Great Britain, and then using that democratization to their
[Guest]: advantage. So in 1885, 1886, there had been these reform bills that had been passed, and
[Guest]: automatically now, you know, maybe 25% of men had the right to vote. Maybe it was a little bit
[Guest]: higher than that. I can't remember. But now more people have the right to vote, and you could be
[Guest]: more popular in your attempts to woo the British voter. And so when he stood for Parliament for the
[Guest]: first time from Holborn, close by to the British Museum, he doesn't just talk about India. He talks
[Guest]: about the rights of Irishmen and Irish women. He talks about labor rights, things like, you know,
[Guest]: eventually stuff like the eight-hour day. He talks to a limited degree about the right of women to
[Guest]: vote. He talks about local municipal issues, problems with the London municipality,
[Guest]: problems with transportation. So he's very clearly linking together India to a whole myriad of other
[Guest]: issues that will capture the attention of the average British voter. And this gives him a bit
[Guest]: more of a fighting chance. And eventually, again, he does lose in 1886. He loses by quite a large
[Guest]: margin. But he doesn't lose as badly as many people thought that he would have.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I was kind of fascinated again by this period, because before this, you mentioned that
[Amit Varma]: earlier there was this, you know, when he goes to Baroda, there is a suspicion that, oh, he's an
[Amit Varma]: ivory tower guy, and he's going to Baroda. And what does he know? And what I find about his
[Amit Varma]: England years, from your book, is that his political skills are remarkable, because
[Amit Varma]: he realizes that India is not a cause, he is not a celebrity. You know, he knows a lot of people,
[Amit Varma]: how does he get ahead? And he forges these three kinds of critical alliances. You know,
[Amit Varma]: one, of course, with the Irish, where, you know, he adopts Irish home rule as, you know, one of his
[Amit Varma]: pet causes. And you point out how, in fact, by the time the election comes around, he's asking
[Amit Varma]: for electors' votes, quote, on behalf of the 5 millions in Ireland, and the 250 millions of India,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And the other two sort of constituencies who he woos are, one is, of course,
[Amit Varma]: the communists. And, you know, he gets more and more drawn to the communists. And of course,
[Amit Varma]: and that obviously means a vote base of workers, and so on. And the third, interestingly, is women,
[Amit Varma]: and women can't even vote at that time, right. But he figures that getting the women on his side
[Amit Varma]: will have other knock on benefits, which indeed it does. So tell me a little bit about the sense
[Amit Varma]: that we get, like, you know, there's another quote that kind of fascinated me is where he
[Amit Varma]: gives a speech at Holborn, which you could quote from, where he says, during the first campaign,
[Amit Varma]: which he loses, where he says, quote, I have lived in this country actually for 20 years.
[Amit Varma]: And I say that if there is one thing more certain than another that I have learned,
[Amit Varma]: it is that the English nation is incompatible with tyranny, stop quote. And of course,
[Amit Varma]: he knows this is bullshit. I mean, you know, so yeah, but he says it because hey, it's a means to
[Amit Varma]: an end. Now, my other deeper question, one is, I want to know a little bit more about your insights
[Amit Varma]: about how he's thinking at this time and how he's doing these alliances. But the other sort of meta
[Amit Varma]: question I have is that one of the things that has always struck me about politics is that politics
[Amit Varma]: corrodes character, in the sense that you might begin out with a certain set of principles,
[Amit Varma]: but then you compromise so much, so much, so much, so much that you yourself change as a result of
[Amit Varma]: that. And those principles which you might have felt so deeply about don't matter anymore. Now,
[Amit Varma]: it's very clear from this biography that that didn't happen to Nauroji, that he was passionate
[Amit Varma]: about the cause right till the end. In fact, when he loses his last election at the start of the
[Amit Varma]: century, it's almost pitiful his reaction to it because he cares so deeply about getting in there
[Amit Varma]: and making change. So it doesn't really happen to him. But at the same time, it's like this is a
[Amit Varma]: point where his public persona and his private persona seem so different, you know. So what's
[Amit Varma]: kind of going on? And what is your sense of how can a person, you know, how is he remaining himself
[Amit Varma]: through this period? It all seems so calculated. How can it not affect you? Like one of the things
[Amit Varma]: that you do point out, and that does seem to be a genuine shift is his drift towards communism,
[Amit Varma]: where in fact, in 1902, he attends a second international like you point out, and he becomes
[Amit Varma]: more and more communist in his rhetoric as the years go by. And that seems to be a, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a genuine shift, whereas he would not have held those views earlier necessarily. But, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what is that whole kind of process like? Because the part that I'm sort of, I mean, I know the
[Amit Varma]: question is a bit long winded, but what I'm fascinated by is not just the events that he's
[Amit Varma]: so cannily putting together these alliances and saying whatever he needs to and dressing
[Amit Varma]: differently for different occasions, as you also point out. But you know, what must be the turmoil
[Amit Varma]: in his mind as he goes through all of these processes? Give me your sense of that.
[Guest]: So I'll just mention at just at the outset, so he was definitely much more attracted to,
[Guest]: he was definitely attracted to socialism, communism, not really, since communism as an
[Guest]: idea was still evolving. And, you know, the ideas of Marx had not really trickled into,
[Guest]: at least the Indian stream of politics as yet. So I mean, I think it's correct to say that he
[Guest]: drifted towards socialism rather than towards communism. But you're right. I mean, you know,
[Guest]: towards the end of his life, he was, you know, associating with these individuals who eventually
[Guest]: will play a role in kind of leading the groundwork for kind of a global, you know,
[Guest]: the growth of communism globally. Now, with regard to your question about, you know,
[Guest]: what's motivating him at this point in time? You know, I think the really abiding passion of his
[Guest]: life was this belief that so many people in India were being affected by poverty. Every year,
[Guest]: you know, if it was a famine year, millions of people would lose their lives. And so he felt
[Guest]: kind of a heartfelt commitment to do all that he could to try to change the situation. He knew that,
[Guest]: you know, everything he did could potentially save, you know, people from this terrible fate.
[Guest]: And, you know, his ultimate goal was to reach a point whereby the drain of wealth would be
[Guest]: stopped and, you know, Indian impoverishment, the cycle of Indian impoverishment would be
[Guest]: reversed. So I think that was kind of the burning fire in him. And that was the reason why he stayed
[Guest]: so true to his core convictions. If you look at all of his close political comrades, they were all
[Guest]: people who had this similar kind of inner fire and made sure that politics did not corrode that
[Guest]: sense of, you know, pure principle. I mean, one of his good friends was Henry Hinman, who was the
[Guest]: founder of the first British Socialist Party. And like Naoroji, Hinman grows more radical as he grows
[Guest]: older. He grows far more radical than Naoroji, of course, in his socialist views. Another friend of
[Guest]: his was Michael Davitt, who was an Irish home ruler who had gone to jail because of his activities and
[Guest]: political views. He was someone who was committed towards pacifism. You know, he ultimately was not
[Guest]: there for the political glory or, you know, money. He was there for principle, you know, fighting on
[Guest]: behalf of his fellow Irishmen and Irishwomen. And so these people, you know, were ideologically
[Guest]: motivated to such a degree to achieve some concrete end that I think they kind of, you know,
[Guest]: immunize themselves from the corroding influences of politics. You can argue that Naoroji was not a
[Guest]: very good politician in this sense. He did not compromise in many ways. He, as far as I can tell,
[Guest]: was not corrupt. You know, he pursued a very honest and deliberate line in all his activities
[Guest]: and that nearly cost him the election in 1892, which he won by five votes. But he very nearly
[Guest]: lost it because he refused to give in to certain tactics that might have, you know, led to some
[Guest]: sort of compromise that might have been politically remunerative, but ultimately would compromise
[Guest]: his core beliefs and his principles. So in that sense, yeah, I mean, he wasn't necessarily a very
[Guest]: good politician. But, you know, I think it's important to keep in mind that, you know, there
[Guest]: were these people in this era, just as they are today, of course, who are so committed to, you
[Guest]: know, doing good and achieving some concrete good that, you know, would have real consequences for
[Amit Varma]: lives on the ground that kept them running. There are people like that in this era, you said?
[Guest]: Perhaps a few. I know it's, you know, we live in such a cynical era, but I think there still
[Amit Varma]: are a few people out there. Okay, I won't ask you for names in this particular
[Amit Varma]: talking about Nauraj, you know, and also when you talk about his
[Amit Varma]: obduracy, I'm struck by what happens during the second election, which he finally wins,
[Amit Varma]: I think 2953 to 2948 or something like that by five votes, as you said. And what's interesting
[Amit Varma]: there is that he gets the candidateship of the Liberal Party. And then there is this internal
[Amit Varma]: rebellion and another Liberal candidate says, no, I'm the candidate. And there is for a couple of
[Amit Varma]: years, tremendous pressure on him to back out of the race. But he is so bullheaded that he just
[Amit Varma]: won't do it. And he hangs in there, and he somehow gets through and he faces a bunch of racism at
[Amit Varma]: this time as well. And one of the reasons that you pointed out might have helped him win is that Lord
[Amit Varma]: Salisbury referred to him as a black man. And this led to an outpouring of number one, sympathy across
[Amit Varma]: England, because you know, they could see that this is clearly a bit too racist, and the racism
[Amit Varma]: of it must have seemed starker, because he was essentially like a British liberal, well spoken,
[Amit Varma]: sophisticated, all of that. And besides outrage, it also leads to a little bit of fact checking
[Amit Varma]: when people point out that actually Lord Salisbury, who is quite swarthy, is actually darker than him.
[Amit Varma]: And this whole process was kind of fascinating. Tell me about what happens when he finally wins.
[Amit Varma]: Like one of the things that strikes me is that number one, when he's standing, it's not as if
[Amit Varma]: he is standing as an individual. It's like he's standing for all of India. Across India, the
[Amit Varma]: people are raising money for him and sending it to him. And it's saying he's India's guy,
[Amit Varma]: you know. So it's almost as if this whole nation is at his back. And then when he finally wins,
[Amit Varma]: you point out how when he comes to India, I think he goes to the Lahore Congress. And over there,
[Amit Varma]: across the way, he does this railway trip, which is, you know, presages Gandhi's trip on the
[Amit Varma]: railways and getting mobbed decades later, where you have these massive mobs everywhere coming to
[Amit Varma]: see him. He, you know, he lands up at Lahore, and there are tens of thousands of people at the
[Amit Varma]: railway station or whatever. And it's just mad. So on the one hand, he is a big hope of India. He
[Amit Varma]: is their guy out there. It's almost like he's been elected President of India when he gets that seat
[Amit Varma]: as an MP. And yet within the British Parliament, he has a really tough time. Tell me a bit about
[Guest]: those years. So two things struck me at least about Naoroji's election. You know, his campaign,
[Guest]: rather, I should say. The first thing was that his campaign took such a long time. I mean,
[Guest]: he's nominated, as you say, and eventually there's a challenge that takes place. He's nominated in
[Guest]: the year 1888, and the election doesn't take place until June of 1892. So you have basically
[Guest]: a four-year-long campaign. And campaigns for Parliament in this era were in the span of days
[Guest]: and weeks normally. And yet here's someone, you know, going in every day for the large part of
[Guest]: four years and fighting internal rebellions that were, as you said, largely based on the question
[Guest]: of race. There are two people who challenge him. And at least as far as I could tell from my
[Guest]: research, those challenges are to a very large degree based on the fact that here was, you know,
[Guest]: a foreigner, someone who looked different, someone who had a name that we can't pronounce,
[Guest]: trying to represent us. And the irony of this was that he was standing in an area called Central
[Guest]: Finsbury, which was then, and is still today, a very radical area. I mean, this is an area that
[Guest]: still has, I think, a Lenin library. There was a statue of Lenin until recently over there. So it
[Guest]: had this very long kind of radical political streak, and yet he's facing this terrible racism
[Guest]: throughout his campaign. And it's so terrible that, you know, he nearly has to, you know,
[Guest]: you know, he's encouraged to quit by many people, including many of his friends, to quit. And as
[Guest]: you mentioned, you know, the prime minister at this point in time, Lord Salisbury, does kind of
[Guest]: an indirect favor to him by calling him a Black man, which sets up a huge debate about racism in
[Guest]: Great Britain. Was it acceptable to call, you know, an Indian a Black? What did that mean? And
[Guest]: of course, there was this whole side debate, as you said, about who actually was darker. And,
[Guest]: you know, that kind of reveals, I guess, a bit more about what racism was like in the Victorian
[Guest]: era than, you know, what, you know, we'd like to think of it. So, you know, he becomes kind of a
[Guest]: popular figure in this era, but that still doesn't help him. You know, he still faces challenges
[Guest]: after that moment to his campaign. And as you mentioned, he wins by only five votes. He becomes
[Guest]: dubbed the other by narrow majority. And that leads me to the second kind of really interesting
[Guest]: thing for me, at least about this election. If you look at the total electoral figures,
[Guest]: about 5,000 people are voting. This sounds kind of like, you know, a small college election,
[Guest]: right? I mean, this is not what you think of as, you know, the exercise of democratic power in,
[Guest]: you know, the beacon of democracy in this era. And that also shows you just how stunted democracy was
[Guest]: in the supposedly democratic parts of the world in this moment. I mean, the franchise, the power
[Guest]: to vote was only extended to those men in Great Britain who owned property and who, you know,
[Guest]: could meet a certain, you know, threshold for earnings. And oftentimes the people who voted
[Guest]: didn't even live in the particular district they were voting for. So, you know, you could be
[Guest]: someone who lived, you know, in a completely different part of London, but because you
[Guest]: owned property or you owned a store in central Finsbury, you had the right to vote. So it was
[Guest]: a very weird and wacky system. And, you know, I learned far too much about Victorian politics and
[Guest]: kind of the intricacies of how it worked in this era than I ever would have wanted to. But, you
[Guest]: know, the long and short of it is, yes, at the end of it, Naoroji is elected. He's elected narrowly,
[Guest]: but he's nevertheless elected. There's a brief recount effort that's put in place where, you
[Guest]: know, the Conservative candidate tries to disqualify Naoroji by saying that several of the
[Guest]: people who voted for him were immigrants, they were Italians or they were French, and how dare
[Guest]: they had the right to vote. But citizenship laws in this era were so vague that, again, even someone
[Guest]: like Naoroji had the right to vote in elections almost from the moment that he stepped on show
[Guest]: in Great Britain, because there was no kind of like law of citizenship at this point in time.
[Guest]: If you were there on the ground and you met your minimum qualifications for income and such,
[Guest]: you had the right to vote. So getting to the second part of your question about how Naoroji
[Guest]: is kind of conceptualized, yes, he is conceptualized as being the MP for India, the member for India.
[Guest]: And it creates, you know, a moment of jubilation across the country. He is flooded with telegrams
[Guest]: and letters from not just around the world, but all corners of India. I mean, when I was looking
[Guest]: through Naoroji's papers, I found letters from Kashmir. I found letters from parts of, you know,
[Guest]: Mysore province, you know, Chikmagalur, the place where coffee is grown, from village India,
[Guest]: from urban India, from Indians living in Shanghai or Zanzibar or, you know, other parts of the
[Guest]: diaspora, South Africa. So this really excites not just Indians in India, but Indians all across
[Guest]: the world. And all Indians, whether they are, you know, an individual living in Chikmagalur or
[Guest]: an elite in Bombay or, you know, an indentured worker in South Africa recognize Naoroji as being
[Guest]: their representative. Finally, they have a voice, right? I mean, finally, there is an Indian
[Guest]: in power who claims to speak for Indians. And consequently, for the next two to three years,
[Guest]: when Naoroji is in parliament, he becomes these people's representatives. So he's dealing with
[Guest]: everything from matters of high policy, you know, the civil service and the question of who is being
[Guest]: appointed to what in the government of India, to the complaints of Indians living in the diaspora
[Guest]: in Madagascar. I mean, up until this point in time, I didn't even know that there were many
[Guest]: Indians in Madagascar, but I found a Gujarati letter from Indians in Madagascar complaining
[Guest]: about their treatment. So, you know, it's fascinating. And you find letters, again,
[Guest]: from Indians living in Guyana who are, you know, talking about their grievances and how Naoroji
[Guest]: will hopefully be able to help them. So it's a moment of kind of unificatory patriotism,
[Guest]: not just across India, but across the Indian diaspora at large. And it creates this huge
[Guest]: moment of hope. And I think for Naoroji, it really feeds into this idea of, you know, that he's held
[Guest]: so close to his heart throughout his life, British justice. You know, he's tried this hard, he's
[Guest]: walked this hard, he's walked against the odds. And finally, after four terrible years of campaigning,
[Guest]: he overcame, he succeeded. And now he would have a chance to make his point. Maybe there was a,
[Guest]: you know, a glimmer of hope in this idea of British justice. And ultimately, it all comes
[Guest]: crashing down. He loses election in 1895. And it's a moment of deep and dismal disappointment.
[Guest]: It's probably the lowest moment in his political career. And we can go on and talk about that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, later on. Yeah, no, before we get to that, I mean, a couple of strands, which I was
[Amit Varma]: kind of fascinated by that, you know, what you're pointing out about India, you know, him being
[Amit Varma]: treated as, you know, India's MP in Parliament, as India's man out there, is actually something
[Amit Varma]: as you, you know, describe in your book, something that's been happening over the couple of decades
[Amit Varma]: before this also, in the sense that he becomes this sort of figurehead of the Indian community
[Amit Varma]: in London. So whenever parents are sending kids to study there, they'll send him a letter,
[Amit Varma]: and they'll say, please make sure he doesn't marry a British girl. And, you know, even Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: apparently is armed with a letter for Naoroji or, you know, your person X and person Y there with
[Amit Varma]: the letter for Naoroji saying, listen, I don't know him, but it doesn't matter. He's Indian.
[Amit Varma]: And he'll, you know, so he is the dude there who's already this massive community figurehead.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing that struck me is how late in his life all of this is happening. You know,
[Amit Varma]: he's 67 at the time he wins that election, you know, he's born in 1825, this is 1892, he's 67,
[Amit Varma]: he's 70 at the time it's done, and he's not even nearly done, like his iconic Congress speech of
[Amit Varma]: 1906 is when he's 81 years old. And we'll kind of come to that later, which is pretty mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: And just reading about his years in Parliament in your book was so impressive, because one,
[Amit Varma]: you've described his schedule before that, where this is not the age of email. So he's like getting
[Amit Varma]: up every day, he's devoting hours to writing letters by hand. He's meeting people constantly,
[Amit Varma]: not just when he's in Parliament, but, you know, for years and years before that, he's giving
[Amit Varma]: speeches, he's doing all of this. And in Parliament, you point out about how he finally gets
[Amit Varma]: a victory that is not a victory, he gets a bill passed, which will allow Indians into the civil
[Amit Varma]: service. But the cabinet, which is from his own party, the Liberal Party, then blocks it and
[Amit Varma]: doesn't do anything with it. Tell me a bit about that sort of process and how it affected him,
[Amit Varma]: because this is where that other transition happens in his life, where he shifts from being
[Amit Varma]: a politician to an agitator. And this failure kind of radicalizes him. Tell me a little bit
[Guest]: about what this process was like. Going to the first part of your question, at least,
[Guest]: with regard to the Indian diaspora in Great Britain and what he was like to these students.
[Guest]: You know, if I were to have written a standalone book on this process, you could almost, you could
[Guest]: probably title it Indian Uncle. You know, he served as kind of the uncle for all of these
[Guest]: people who came to Great Britain to study, to work, sightseeing, you know, everyone and anyone
[Guest]: who is coming to Great Britain from India is asking him for help. And this was one of the
[Guest]: fun things that I was able to do when I was in the archives, you know, since Naoroji kept
[Guest]: everything. He was a pack rat. He was very pious in that sense. He kept everything. And I can
[Guest]: sympathize being a pious thief. You read the letters that were written to him and they cover
[Guest]: everything. So family disputes, you know, my son has sailed to London. He has not paid us
[Guest]: remittances. What's going on? My husband has left us. He is somewhere in London. Can you help me?
[Guest]: All the way down to the most mundane of things. Can you get me tickets to go see a session of
[Guest]: Parliament? Can you arrange for me to meet the Queen? I mean, completely absurd things like that.
[Guest]: You know, so everyone is asking him these questions. And most of the letters that I saw,
[Guest]: there would be a small little note on top of them indicating the date he replied. So the
[Guest]: incredible thing was, regardless of how absurd the question was, he still had the time. He still
[Guest]: made the time to reply. It could have been a one line note saying, sorry, I can't help you meet
[Guest]: the Queen. But in many cases, it was a detailed response saying, you know, I'm trying to get in
[Guest]: touch with your long lost son and encouraging him to write to you. Or I'm trying to find your
[Guest]: husband or, you know, your brother or your son passed away. I'm making arrangements for, you
[Guest]: know, the funeral and, you know, money to be sent back home. So he was really involved in the nitty
[Guest]: gritty of the lives of hundreds, if not thousands of Indians during his time in Great Britain. I
[Guest]: mean, he really evolves as kind of this father figure or uncle, if you will, for the Indian
[Guest]: community. And so as a consequence, you get a snapshot of what Indian life was like, all the
[Guest]: troubles that people faced, their complaints about the weather, the food, British people and,
[Guest]: you know, whether they were friendly or not friendly, and also the good things that they
[Guest]: felt they experienced in British society, their friends, the fact that Britain was, you know,
[Guest]: much more educated society that, you know, socially, it was much more liberal. So, you know,
[Guest]: in that sense, Nehruji is important to us for understanding socially how the diaspora develops
[Guest]: in a place like Great Britain. Now, with regard to his time in Parliament, and, you know, kind of
[Guest]: the effect that it has on him. So as I said, yes, he begins in this moment of rosy optimism. And if
[Guest]: you read the speeches he gives in Parliament during his first few years, they are very
[Guest]: congratulatory towards British rule. You know, he says great things about what British rule has done.
[Guest]: It's this force of progressivism. He's a loyal member of the Empire. And a very strong and
[Guest]: distinct break takes place after he realizes that, you know, the goal of his time in Parliament,
[Guest]: getting civil service reform would ultimately be thwarted. So as you said, you know, he succeeded
[Guest]: in getting a non-binding resolution for civil service reform passed in Parliament. And he did
[Guest]: this against great odds. He did this at a time when most parliamentarians were at home asleep,
[Guest]: very late at night. There were only a few stragglers left in the House, but just enough,
[Guest]: he made sure that there were just enough so that you would have a quorum and a vote could take
[Guest]: place. And this was significant because it left Gladstone, the Prime Minister at the time,
[Guest]: completely red-faced. His government was against it. It was the first defeat the government had
[Guest]: faced, and it was a defeat by a fellow Liberal MP. So it's extremely embarrassing. But, you know,
[Guest]: this was all part of Naroji's strategy. And when he goes back to India for the first time after
[Guest]: being elected to Parliament, it's kind of like a victory lap. And he promises that now, you know,
[Guest]: having passed this non-binding resolution, the British people and the Parliament would be
[Guest]: honour-bound to, you know, commit themselves to this reform. And ultimately, that's not what
[Guest]: happened. And when he realizes that this would not happen instantaneously, you see a tone,
[Guest]: a change of tone. So he starts talking about the evils of British rule again. He starts comparing
[Guest]: the fate of Indians to those of slaves in America. He says that Indians were actually probably worse
[Guest]: off than slaves in America, because at least in America, there had been an incentive to keep
[Guest]: those slaves alive. In India, there was no incentive, you know, and therefore millions
[Guest]: of people died. So again, he becomes very bitter and very radical towards the end of his career.
[Guest]: And worse than that, he realizes that not many people are listening. So ultimately,
[Guest]: he would have thought that once you got to the stage of being an MP in Parliament,
[Guest]: people would listen to you. But you had magazines like Punch making fun of Naroji, saying that he's,
[Guest]: you know, giving this long speech and no one is listening and people are just making fun of him.
[Guest]: So it's a moment of great despondency. And as you said, you know, he's 70 years old at this
[Guest]: point in time, he could have thrown in the towel, retired back to India, given up and, you know,
[Guest]: been a very bitter man but given up and he doubles down, if you will, he decides to become
[Guest]: more radical. He decides to amplify his schedule. So he spends even more hours writing speeches or
[Guest]: responding to people's letters, kind of haranguing colleagues to become more radical. And that
[Guest]: sets up the last moment of his political career where he kind of embarks on this much more radical
[Amit Varma]: phase of politics. Yeah, and that was almost kind of poignant that, and I guess it's a combination
[Amit Varma]: of the two, but I was trying to figure out, was this radicalization because of the contingency
[Amit Varma]: of his failure that he was just so frustrated that he lashed out and whatever or was he perhaps
[Amit Varma]: expressing the radicalism he felt all along, because it was now no point in putting a veneer
[Amit Varma]: on it that wasn't helping? Or was it that simply at this point in his intellectual journey,
[Amit Varma]: he realized that these kind of moderate methods, petitioning and blah, blah, blah,
[Amit Varma]: are not going to work and therefore you have to try something else. But I also found this poignant
[Amit Varma]: because of course, he misses the 1900 elections because he's ill. And of course, he's, you know,
[Amit Varma]: 75 at the time, but then he stands in the next elections, loses badly. And then it's so sad
[Amit Varma]: because he writes to his Irish friends and almost begs him for a safe seat there. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and he's turned down because there are internal squabbles happening there. And it's like he
[Amit Varma]: realizes that this is my last chance, I have to get into parliament and do this, get this
[Amit Varma]: resolution passed. And eventually, that's kind of not happening. And the really interesting thing is
[Amit Varma]: you think at this point, he's done and dusted. But 1906, when he's 81 years old, is still almost a
[Amit Varma]: seminal moment for the Congress Party, because the extremists are fighting with the moderates.
[Amit Varma]: And as a way of stopping Tilak, like you point out, you know, Tilak is being intransigent and
[Amit Varma]: wants to be president of the Congress. And as a way of stopping that, they call in Naoroji. And
[Amit Varma]: even though the moderates think he's too extremist, and the extremists think he's too moderate, like
[Amit Varma]: you say, he's in, they all agree to him and he goes out there and he gives a speech, which he
[Amit Varma]: makes his compadre Gokhale readout, which is also an interesting tactic. Tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: that. And why is it so seminal? Why is it such a remarkable moment in Indian politics, what
[Guest]: Naoroji now says? So going back as to why Naoroji radicalized at this moment, I mean, I think it's a
[Guest]: little bit of the various reasons that you mentioned, you know, so at one point, he realized
[Guest]: that now that he wasn't in the in parliament, and he wasn't immediately standing for parliament,
[Guest]: he could afford to be more radical. You know, he first talks about self-government for India
[Guest]: publicly in the year 1884. And then in the year 1885, all references to self-government disappear.
[Guest]: And that's because this is, you know, when he starts to talk about standing for parliament,
[Guest]: and if you want to stand for parliament in Great Britain, talking about getting self-government
[Guest]: from Britain is probably not your most effective strategy. So he stops talking about it. And it's
[Amit Varma]: only... And also, no one's taken screenshots on Twitter. So it's okay. Exactly. Yeah, this is a
[Guest]: much easier moment, I guess, for, you know, people's former statements to, you know, kind of
[Guest]: pass by and not be commented upon. So he doesn't talk about self-government, even though it's there
[Guest]: in the back of his mind. And if you look at his private correspondence, he's still talking about
[Guest]: it with people like Alan Octavian Hume. And after 1895, well, the gloves are off, right? I mean,
[Guest]: you can start to talk about more radical views. And so he starts to talk again about kind of the
[Guest]: evil nature of British rule, a foreign government being, you know, terrible for India. He starts to
[Guest]: talk about the possibility of a second mutiny, because people were just so sick and tired
[Guest]: of, you know, the terrible effects of imperial rule. And ultimately, he starts talking again
[Guest]: about self-government. And he makes this public, even though he's standing for parliament at the
[Guest]: same time. So now, you know, he just doesn't care that that contradiction might be there.
[Guest]: And I think one reason for why he's able to let this slide is because he realizes,
[Guest]: you know, the fact of mortality staring at him in the face. As you said, he's, you know,
[Guest]: in his 70s when he, you know, when he loses his re-election bid in parliament and in his early
[Guest]: 70s when he's kind of radicalizing. And he realizes that these are his last chances to
[Guest]: kind of make effective change. He struggled all these decades on behalf of ameliorating
[Guest]: the condition of India. And during this period of time, again, it's, you know,
[Guest]: the terrible things happening in India. The government in power is more reactionary and
[Guest]: conservative. There's the plague epidemic in Western India, coupled with a famine.
[Guest]: So the news coming out of India is awful, absolutely terrible. And if you read letters
[Guest]: written by people like Gokhale or Beramji Malbari, you know, they're heartbreaking.
[Guest]: You know, when I read them in the archives some 120 years after they were written,
[Guest]: you're really struck by just how awful things were. You know, people's relatives dying from
[Guest]: plague, famine camps being set up all around the country, people leaving Bombay in masks to escape
[Guest]: the plague, and this very kind of draconian effort on part of the British government to
[Guest]: kind of crack down on health and sanitation in order to, you know, alleviate the plague.
[Guest]: It was an awful moment. And so I think Naoroji felt all this more keenly,
[Guest]: because everything that he had struggled for seemed to be at stake. So, you know,
[Guest]: a part of it was trying to stand for parliament again, making a last ditch effort to be elected.
[Guest]: And as you mentioned, in 1900, he can't stand for parliament because he's too sick. His doctor
[Guest]: actually tells him if you stand for parliament, there's a good chance you will die because,
[Guest]: you know, your respiratory problems that you're having could lead to, you know,
[Guest]: influenza and could lead to other diseases that, you know, could cause you to die. I mean,
[Guest]: you're 75 years old at this point in time. He tries again in 1905, 1906, when he's 80 years old,
[Guest]: and people around him are asking him, good God, what are you doing? Why are you, a man of 80,
[Guest]: trying to get into parliament? And, you know, he still has that fitness of, you know, of being
[Guest]: to give multiple speeches a day, to address multiple crowds, to write letters. Maybe it's
[Guest]: his diet of raw eggs. I don't know. I mean, maybe that keeps him ticking. Who knows? But, you know,
[Guest]: he still has the energy of someone who is 20 years younger. And that kind of propels him in this more
[Guest]: radical direction. He knows that time is not on his side, yet he still has the energy, he still
[Guest]: has the drive, and he still knows that whatever he's doing, you know, has a chance to help save
[Guest]: people in his country from even worse poverty and famine and, you know, the plague epidemic.
[Guest]: So there's still that drive. And ultimately, you know, all of that collapses after his
[Guest]: Congress speech in 1906. His health gives way. And, you know, all of a sudden, this man of 81
[Guest]: years of age, who had been acting like a man of 50 or something, now is in his 80s. I mean,
[Guest]: he just cannot go any longer. But it sustains him long enough to do what he needs to do,
[Guest]: which is, again, give that speech to the Congress in 1906, where he really kind of helps tilt the
[Guest]: balance in favor of the extremists. You know, as you said, both the moderates and the extremists
[Guest]: kind of saw Naoroji as a compromise candidate. He kind of fell in between two stools in the sense
[Guest]: that he was too moderate for the extremists, but too radical for the moderates. And the moderates
[Guest]: really hope that he ultimately will help them preserve their basis of power in the Congress
[Guest]: through his leadership at the Congress. And the few eyewitness reports that we have of what people
[Guest]: like, say, Gokhale or Mehta or, you know, others like Surendranath Banerjee and such are thinking
[Guest]: after the Congress is a certain feeling of being crestfallen. They felt that Naoroji has really
[Guest]: passed on the baton to the extremists. And we know that Tilak, after the Congress speech
[Guest]: that Naoroji gives, has taken place. You know, again, he criticizes Naoroji's moderacy,
[Guest]: but he also says, look, you know, he has agreed with us, us being the extremists,
[Guest]: that Swaraj is the way to go for it. We can disagree with him about methods,
[Guest]: but he ultimately agrees with us for the end. So the means are different that we have,
[Guest]: but the ultimate end of Swaraj, and not necessarily Swaraj under British rule,
[Guest]: Naoroji is on the same page with us. And even, you know, fierce critics like Dipenchandra Pal
[Guest]: ultimately realize this as well, that Naoroji has done us more good than bad through his Congress
[Amit Varma]: speech of 1906. You know, the wording of the speech is fascinating in the sense that before
[Amit Varma]: this, as you point out, he's always, one, he uses the term Swaraj, which is Tilak's term and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, very deliberately. And the other thing that you point out is that before he has always
[Amit Varma]: spoken to self-rule in the sense of, you know, like the dominions like Australia or Canada or
[Amit Varma]: whatever, which are still part of the British Empire. But now he says like Australia or Canada
[Amit Varma]: or the UK, which means, you know, completely independent. And he doesn't need to spell it out.
[Amit Varma]: Just saying like the UK, as you point out, is, you know, a big seminal moment. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you can imagine why, you know, you've spoken in your book about how Feroz Shah Mehta was so upset
[Amit Varma]: and crestfallen and all of that. And one can sort of totally imagine. And this shift happens and he
[Amit Varma]: lives till 92. He dies in 1917. He shows traces of activity in that time, but he doesn't really,
[Amit Varma]: he's not really too active after this. Gandhi comes to India and meets him, all of that happens.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the things which you mentioned you couldn't do much about during the book,
[Amit Varma]: because there isn't much written on it is, of course, his personal life. He got married at
[Amit Varma]: the age of 11 when his wife was seven, of course, which is the kind of classic child marriage thing
[Amit Varma]: that you have then. He had kids with her, many, many grandchildren, all of that. You know,
[Amit Varma]: you gave us a sense of his grief when his son Ardashir dies at the age of 35 and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And one gets a sense of him as a father, even that moment when his daughter writes to him and
[Amit Varma]: says, please come to India for my wedding. And he writes back saying, no, no, the nation is
[Amit Varma]: important. You want me to give this up? So, I got a kind of a sense of those conflicts,
[Amit Varma]: but there's no mention of his wife anywhere. And obviously, as a biographer, you're looking for
[Amit Varma]: that. So, how do you sort of deal with that? Do you feel like there's something incomplete there?
[Guest]: Absolutely. That was the most frustrating aspect of my research. So, as you mentioned,
[Guest]: Naoroji was married when he was 11 and his wife was, I believe, seven. And they ultimately were
[Guest]: married for 70 years. And his wife apparently was not literate. She apparently had limited interest
[Guest]: in learning. At least this is what we know from R.P. Massani's biography that he wrote in 1939.
[Guest]: Massani knew the Naoroji family, so he would have known family stories and such. There's no way for
[Guest]: me to verify this because there's just no material. So, when I looked through the Naoroji papers,
[Guest]: there was a collection of family correspondence, but there were no letters from Naoroji's wife. She
[Guest]: didn't write or she wasn't able to write. And his wife only comes up every once in a while
[Guest]: in correspondence. I mean, this was extremely striking for me because, you know, here's a man
[Guest]: who talks a lot about feminism, right? I mean, he's consorting with some of the leading feminists
[Guest]: in the world, you know, throughout his political career. He's talked about female education and
[Guest]: he's acted upon it and yet his own wife is such a distant and remote character for the biographer to
[Guest]: understand. I mean, you know, a friend of mine, a very good friend of mine found a picture of her
[Guest]: after having dug through a bunch of old and dusty newspapers in Baroda. And I was shocked to find
[Guest]: this picture because I'd never seen it before. I mean, there are just no descriptions of her
[Guest]: throughout his correspondence. So, you know, I would have loved to have written much more about
[Guest]: his family. But ultimately, you know, two things constricted me. One was, of course, word limit,
[Guest]: you know, there's only so much you could write about it. And the second was there just wasn't
[Guest]: that much material about his wife and many of his other children. We know a lot more about his
[Guest]: grandchildren. In fact, you know, still to this day, I get emails from people every once in a
[Guest]: while who said, you know, they knew his grandchildren or, you know, they were related
[Guest]: to him. So I'm still kind of piecing together a few, you know, pictures of stories of his
[Guest]: grandchildren. So what I can tell you definitely is that even though his marital relationship,
[Guest]: we don't know much about, and it doesn't seem like, you know, it was, you know, a marriage of
[Guest]: equals in many way. And, you know, on that ground, we can criticize Naroji for, you know, perhaps
[Guest]: not, you know, spending more time with his wife or not making more of an effort to kind of
[Guest]: integrate him into his, you know, his social world. But we do know that amongst his granddaughters,
[Guest]: he was extremely supportive of their ambitions, you know, with what they did. And, you know,
[Guest]: his granddaughters included people like the Captain Sisters, who are important players in
[Guest]: the nationalist movement under Gandhi. They were, you know, radical extremists who worked with
[Guest]: Madam Kama and even with Savarkar, and then ultimately gave this up in favor of Gandhi's
[Guest]: political following. My favorite character from his generation of grandchildren was a person
[Guest]: called Khurshid Ben Naroji, and I've written an essay separately on her. She was Naroji's
[Guest]: youngest granddaughter through his son. So his son, as you mentioned, Adi, passed away in 1893.
[Guest]: And Khurshid Ben was born after the son passed away, so born posthumously.
[Guest]: And she was trained as a classical singer. She was trained in French, and she goes and studies
[Guest]: in Paris, and eventually even spends a bit of time in Greece, where she meets a very important
[Guest]: figure involved in reviving the Delphic games in Greece in the early 20th century.
[Guest]: And she comes back to India, and she gives all of this up in order to join Gandhi, and not just
[Guest]: join Gandhi in terms of, you know, temperance activities and walking in Sabarmati Ashram and
[Guest]: such. She does a completely amazing and courageous thing by deciding in the 1930s to go out to the
[Guest]: northwest frontier province and preach nonviolence to Dacoits. So she learns Pashto, and she goes
[Guest]: around to camps of Dacoits. And imagine this, you know, petite, Anglicized, Parsi woman who was a
[Guest]: classical singer living in Paris up until recently. Her house is on Napier and Sea Road in
[Guest]: Bombay, and now she's traipsing through Waziristan, talking to Dacoits and saying, please, you know,
[Guest]: stop kidnapping Hindus, you know, in order to restore Hindu-Muslim unity. Instead, why don't
[Guest]: you weave Khadar and, you know, learn about Gandhi. It's a completely ballsy thing that she's doing.
[Guest]: She, at several points in time, is probably nearly killed. I mean, she writes to Gandhi about
[Guest]: bullets whizzing by her in the desert. They're pretty remarkable letters. So, you know,
[Guest]: all of this is kind of, you know, comes from a political spirit that Naoroji helps inculcate
[Guest]: in his children and grandchildren. So, you know, his family legacy, even though it might not have
[Guest]: been very well reflected in his relationship with his wife, it's reflected in the political
[Amit Varma]: activities of his children and grandchildren. This is so fascinating. I can totally see this as a
[Amit Varma]: grand Bollywood film. So, you know, I've taken a lot of your time, two kind of final lines of
[Amit Varma]: inquiry. One is, you know, towards the end of his life, one, he himself becomes very embittered with
[Amit Varma]: his failure in Parliament or what he sees as his failure in Parliament and so on. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you point out how one of his constant enemies in London, Shyamji Krishnavarma, who I promise
[Amit Varma]: was no relative of mine, Shyamji Krishnavarma then sort of criticizes him and calls him a
[Amit Varma]: grand failure and says that he's achieved nothing through all these years. And, you know, when I
[Amit Varma]: kind of, for me, this, you know, looking at that period of Indian history always seems to me really
[Amit Varma]: weird because everything seems coherent till the second decade of the 20th century. You have the
[Amit Varma]: moderates who are doing their petitioning, who are trying to work with government. You have the
[Amit Varma]: extremists on the other hand, who are gradually moving apart and all narratives are coherent.
[Amit Varma]: And then up comes this black swan event called Gandhi and he turns everything around. And it's
[Amit Varma]: like nothing that happened before that was even required or made any sense or whatever. So, on
[Amit Varma]: the one hand, because, you know, that's also the decade when Gokhale dies, Feroz Shah Mehta dies,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and of course, Naoroji dies, but he's already so old anyway, he's
[Amit Varma]: basically out of it. So, the moderates are out. But then again, it's a completely different stand,
[Amit Varma]: which is nothing, which is no continuity, which seems to have no continuity with what came before.
[Amit Varma]: So, one, looking back at his legacy and the fact that, yes, you know, on the surface of it,
[Amit Varma]: it seems like he didn't get much done. So, was he a failure? Did he have a legacy beyond that?
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps, is that legacy his failure in a sense? Because, you know, Gandhi at one point,
[Amit Varma]: you point out how Gandhi is telling one of his colleagues in South Africa around 1909 or 1910,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, we must not give up because look at Dada bhai, he's been at it for 40 years.
[Amit Varma]: And if you look at all of, for example, you know, one thing people don't realize when we think about
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi, such a mythological figure is that all of Gandhi's Satyagrahas basically failed,
[Amit Varma]: including the ones in South Africa. But he just, you know, the last was sort of a half-hearted,
[Amit Varma]: face-saving semi-success. But Gandhi essentially kept failing, kept failing, kept failing, but he
[Amit Varma]: kept at it and then at some point that turned. So, is that Naoroji's legacy or is there a legacy
[Amit Varma]: beyond the failure of it? How do we, you know, when we now look back at him, besides the mythology
[Amit Varma]: of Grand Old Man of India or the Indian uncle, as you point out, what do we see? Is it a frustratingly
[Amit Varma]: wasted life, you know, lived with the best intention, but going nowhere or, you know,
[Amit Varma]: is it easy to say that in hindsight and did he actually move the needle in ways that are not
[Guest]: so visible today? That's an excellent question because these are questions that I'm trying to
[Guest]: wrestle with in my next book. Oftentimes, both from our perspective and from the perspective
[Guest]: of someone in, say, the 1930s or the 1940s, you could look upon moderate nationalism,
[Guest]: this kind of early phase of nationalism, as being a bit of a failure. What did they do,
[Guest]: right? I mean, the Congress was this small party that was relatively elite and city-based.
[Guest]: What reforms were really, you know, wrested from the British government? And ultimately,
[Guest]: only when Gandhi comes to the scene do you really have a mass-based movement where there is
[Guest]: significant, you know, change on the ground. Now, the thing about this is that even people like
[Guest]: Gandhi realized how wrong that perspective was. Gandhi acknowledged himself. He did not come out
[Guest]: of any, you know, he didn't come out of nowhere, right? I mean, he came out of the particular
[Guest]: heritage that India had accumulated in terms of its nationalist history and its political trajectory.
[Guest]: And, you know, there's a passage in Hind Swaraj where Gandhi defends Naoroji by saying, you know,
[Guest]: we stand on the shoulders of our, you know, those who come before us, you know, that whole metaphor,
[Guest]: right? You can see farther because of what people have done beforehand. And he says,
[Guest]: Naoroji was the person who really kind of laid the foundations. And I think that's what Naoroji's
[Guest]: greatest legacy was. I mean, it was easy for people like Shyamji Krishnavarma to call him
[Guest]: a failure because, you know, ultimately he did not achieve civil service reform, right? He did
[Guest]: not stop the drain of wealth. I mean, India was poorer and more fab and written in the year 1900
[Guest]: than it had been when Naoroji started his political career in the 1860s. And Swaraj, of course,
[Guest]: was a very distant goal. So, you know, on those three particular goals, of course, Naoroji failed
[Guest]: in order to achieve those things. But ultimately he laid the organizational and the philosophical
[Guest]: and kind of political economic foundations upon which Indian nationalism eventually did achieve
[Guest]: success. I mean, when we think of any aspect of Indian nationalism, whether it was the organization
[Guest]: in terms of the Indian National Congress, whether it was the particular message about how poverty
[Guest]: was the kind of the central feature of why British rule was so bad for India, whether it was the
[Guest]: international aspects of Indian nationalism. I mean, this is something which I'm trying to
[Guest]: talk more about in my next book, about how people like Naoroji did not make Indian nationalism just
[Guest]: about India. It was about much more than just India. It was a much more global campaign for
[Guest]: emancipation. Any of these aspects had Naoroji at the very core. Naoroji was the people who laid
[Guest]: the groundwork for many of these aspects of Indian nationalism. He wasn't alone. I mean,
[Guest]: many other people were part and parcel of this process, but he was at the very center of all
[Guest]: these various networks. So it's really impossible to understand Indian nationalism without Naoroji.
[Guest]: Because if you were adopting Gandhi's or Tilak's methods in the 1860s through pretty much the 1880s
[Guest]: and 1890s, you would have been cut off. There was no way the British government would have
[Guest]: countenanced your activities. And Gokhale himself recognized this in regards to Alan Octavian Hume.
[Guest]: When Hume dies in 1912, Gokhale delivers this eulogy for Hume saying, no one else could have
[Guest]: founded the Congress. It had to have been a British ex-official founding the Congress because
[Guest]: otherwise it would have been shut down. The government would have shut it down and dissolved
[Guest]: the Congress. And indeed, you know, the viceroys in power, Lansdowne and Dufferin, nearly did shut
[Guest]: down the Congress. I mean, if you read their correspondence, they're this close to even,
[Guest]: you know, charging someone like Hume, a fellow British person, a fellow member of the civil
[Guest]: service with sedition and treason. So you can only imagine what, you know, they would have done to
[Guest]: Naoroji or Gokhale and what they did eventually do to Tilak by, you know, acting out on these
[Guest]: threats. I mean, there would have been no question of the, you know, the velvet glove being off and
[Guest]: the, you know, the metal fist of imperialism quashing and crushing these individuals.
[Guest]: So in that regard, it's impossible to really think of us, think of Naoroji as being a failure.
[Guest]: They did as much as they could do under the circumstances. In fact, they went beyond it
[Guest]: in many ways. And, you know, they prepared the ground for a later generation when it was much
[Guest]: easier to kind of go against the grain of British imperialism. And finally, I'll, you know, I'll
[Amit Varma]: leave it to readers to read your book and to kind of discover Dadabhai Naoroji's fascinating life
[Amit Varma]: for themselves. But I'll shift back to the personal now. You know, biographers sometimes
[Amit Varma]: say that by the time they finish a biography, they feel bereaved when it's over. It's like a sense of
[Amit Varma]: loss because you get so attached to the person that you're writing about. Has it kind of been
[Amit Varma]: like that for you, especially as there'll be a lot of, I'm guessing, cultural echoes because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you're also Parsi, you're in Bombay right now, you know, there would be sort of echoes
[Amit Varma]: of that also. So, you know, what was the relationship between you and Naoroji through
[Amit Varma]: this book? You know, how did it feel when it was over and in what ways did it sort of enrich
[Guest]: your thinking, as it were? I heard your conversation with Saman Subramaniam and I
[Guest]: remember he mentioned that feeling towards Haldane. Curiously, I have not felt it. It's
[Guest]: odd. I mean, I remember when I did my undergraduate thesis, it wasn't even a biographical
[Guest]: project. It was on the construction of the city of Delhi. I felt a tremendous amount of just kind of
[Guest]: meaningless after it was turned in. It was almost like depression, you know, after you turned it in
[Guest]: and what do I do now? And I haven't had that feeling with Naoroji probably because he's not
[Guest]: done for me. You know, I have, I'm sitting on thousands of his letters that I eventually want
[Guest]: to publish. So, you know, there still is more work that I want to incorporate him into. And secondly,
[Guest]: the next book that I'm working on currently, you know, which has been thrown a little bit
[Guest]: asunder because of the whole pandemic, is on early Indian nationalism in general. And again,
[Guest]: kind of trying to show about why it was relevant, not just in its era, but in our era. I mean, why
[Guest]: the, you know, the principles and ideas that they fought for and enunciated are as valid today as
[Guest]: they were back then. And Naoroji, of course, has a big part to play in it. I'm looking at
[Guest]: other figures, I mean, like Lal Mohan Ghosh or Hume or eventually people like Ranade or
[Guest]: Feroz Shah Mehta, but Naoroji is always there. I mean, his correspondence figures
[Guest]: there, his ideas are important, and he's always hovering in the background. So,
[Guest]: strangely, I haven't felt that feeling of mourning as yet. You know, he'll be an important part of
[Guest]: my life, whether I like it or not, you know, for many years to come. I can't wait to read
[Amit Varma]: your next book, because that period of history also kind of fascinates me. You know, I went to
[Amit Varma]: college in Ferguson College, Pune, and it was only years after I had graduated and left that
[Amit Varma]: I realized what a rich history it has in terms of so many of the moderate leaders of that era,
[Amit Varma]: in fact, being there. And one of my favorite stories is, you know, Gopal Ganesh Agarkar,
[Amit Varma]: who sadly died too young. He was once teaching, I think, a biology class at Ferguson College.
[Amit Varma]: And he asked him the question that, if donkeys had a gourd, what would the gourd look like?
[Amit Varma]: And then, I don't know how I'll do this in a podcast, but he basically held both his hands
[Amit Varma]: above his ears, you know, to imitate donkey ears. And that is such a fantastic thing. And you say
[Amit Varma]: that those leaders can have lessons for today. I don't think Agarkar could have gotten away with
[Amit Varma]: it today for all you know. But, Dinyar, it's just been so amazing talking to you. Thanks so much for
[Guest]: your time and insights. Thank you very much, Amit. It's been a pleasure to be on this program.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do hop on over to your nearest bookstore,
[Amit Varma]: online or offline, and pick up Navroji, Pioneer of Indian Nationalism by Dinyar Patel. You can
[Amit Varma]: follow Dinyar on Twitter at Dinyar Patel, one word. You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T,
[Amit Varma]: B-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: you